Explore the Universe Welcome to the Universe Discover the universe: Learn about the history of the cosmos, what it's made of, and so much more. Explore: Exoplanets Worlds beyond our solar system. Stars Giant balls of hot gas that burn for millions to billions of years. Black Holes Concentrations of matter with gravity so powerful not even light can escape. Galaxies Collections of stars, planets, and vast clouds of gas and dust bound together by gravity. Featured Story NASA’s Dark Universe-Seeking Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Launches Now on a three-month, million-mile journey to its final orbit, NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will soon reveal the… Read the Story A Universe of Fun and Learning Fun Exploring the Universe Astrobiology Learning Resources Online Activities with NASA’s Hubble Learn with NASA’s Webb Roman's Educational Activities Fun Exploring the Universe Explore our universe with these inspiring, informative, and fun activities and related resources. From coloring pages to quirky videos, you’ll enjoy learning about our fascinating cosmos. Read More Pre-handwriting tracers are an activity that help youngsters get ready for writing by tracing fun lines and curves. A young boy uses a marker to trace the tumbling path of asteroids on one of these activity sheets. NASA/Ashley Balzer Astrobiology Learning Resources Find coloring pages, graphic novels, and posters focused on astrobiology, or the study of life in the universe. Learn how it began, how it evolved here on Earth, and where it might exist elsewhere. Read More Students in a library classroom NASA/Aaron Gronstal Online Activities with NASA’s Hubble Expand your cosmic horizons and get to know Hubble. Explore interactives, sky maps, games, Hubble models, and more. Read More Looking like a broad-brimmed Mexican hat, the “Sombrero” galaxy, M104, is a spiral galaxy seen nearly edge-on. NASA and The Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA) Learn with NASA’s Webb Explore an ever growing list of Webb-related activities that illuminate, educate, and encourage you to create. Items in this page include art projects, virtual reality, 360 images, interactives, podcasts, models, games, books, posters, educational products, and more. Read More An easy to build model of Webb Space Telescope Jenny Chan / Origami Tree Roman's Educational Activity Center Learning can be fun with NASA's Roman. Check out their activities. Read More In honor of the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, the team released some space crafts you can complete at home! NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Featured Video Studying Dark Energy With NASA's Roman Space Telescope Scientists have discovered that a mysterious pressure dubbed “dark energy” makes up about 68% of the total energy content of the cosmos. Exploring the nature of dark energy is one of the primary reasons NASA built the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, whose measurements will help illuminate the dark energy puzzle. Learn More Galaxy Gallery: Galactic Gems Glisten in New Gallery From NASA’s Chandra 18 Images Go To Gallery Go To Gallery NASA’s IXPE May Have Proven 90-Year-Old Theory NASA’s IXPE (Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer) found strong evidence to support a 90-year-old quantum theory that suggests the vacuum of space can be altered by extreme magnetic fields. IXPE used its unique X-ray vision on a supermagnetized stellar remnant to test this idea. Learn More about NASA’s IXPE May Have Proven 90-Year-Old Theory Featured News Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars Article 4 Min Read NASA Telescopes Create Colorful ‘Craft’ From Nearby Nebula 5 Min Read Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years Article 4 Min Read Lion Nebula Roars to Life With NASA’s Webb Article 1 Min Read Webb Opens Treasure Chest Image Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics. James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Chandra X-ray Observatory The Chandra X-ray Observatory is the world's most powerful X-ray telescope.

Explore This Section Exoplanets An exoplanet is any planet beyond our solar system. Most of them orbit other stars, but some free-floating exoplanets, called rogue planets, are untethered to any star. We’ve confirmed more than 6,000 exoplanets, out of the billions that we believe exist. Unable to render the provided source 6K, and counting... 6,000 Exoplanets! The milestone of extra-solar planets confirmed by NASA highlights the accelerating rate of discoveries, just over three decades since the first exoplanets were found. The Habitable Zone The area around a star where its planets could have liquid water on the surface. Also called “Goldilocks zones,” where conditions might be just right — not too hot, not too cold — for life. Why We Search Whether life exists beyond Earth is one of the most profound questions of all time. The answer — whatever it is — will change us forever. Exoplanet Travel Bureau Even the closest exoplanets are too far away to visit. But… what if they weren't? Scientists, futurists, and artists have helped us select several destinations. Suit up and join a tour! Exoplanet Catalog Learn more about every confirmed exoplanet — more than 6,000 and counting — in this continuously updated resource. View interactive 3D models, and read descriptions and vital statistics. Overview Most of the exoplanets discovered so far are in a relatively small region of our galaxy, the Milky Way. (“Small” meaning within thousands of light-years of our solar system; one light-year equals 5.88 trillion miles, or 9.46 trillion kilometers.) Even the closest known exoplanet to Earth, Proxima Centauri b , is still about 4 light-years away. We know there are more planets than stars in the galaxy. By measuring exoplanets’ sizes (diameters) and masses (weights), we can see compositions ranging from rocky (like Earth and Venus) to gas-rich (like Jupiter and Saturn). Some planets may be dominated by water or ice, while others are dominated by iron or carbon. We’ve identified lava worlds covered in molten seas, puffy planets the density of Styrofoam and dense cores of planets still orbiting their stars. NASA Launches ‘Discovery Machine,’ the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope This flagship mission set sail Sunday, Aug. 30, to open a new era of unprecedented cosmic surveys. Its crisp, panoramic view of space combined with fast survey speeds will give astronomers a chance to study the universe as never before. Its launch from NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida began a three-month, million-mile journey to its final orbit; once there, “Roman will be a discovery machine,” said NASA Science head Nicky Fox, bringing us “closer than ever before to answering humanity’s most profound questions about our cosmic history.” When it begins its work in early 2027, Roman will help astronomers explore dark matter , dark energy , and worlds outside of our solar system , known as exoplanets. In three decades of discovery, scientists have so far confirmed 6,300+ exoplanets in our galaxy; Roman is expected to discover 100,000 more. Learn About the Roman Telescope Launch about NASA Launches ‘Discovery Machine,’ the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope watch the replay Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Launch NASA’s next great spaceborne observatory rocketed into the sky above Florida at 7:26 a.m. EDT Sunday, Aug. 30, beginning a three-month, million-mile journey to its final orbit. There the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, named for NASA’s first chief astronomer, will open a deep, panoramic view of the cosmos, generating unprecedented images that will revolutionize our understanding of the universe. Learn More: Visit the Roman Telescope Blog checking out the neighbors ‘Other Stars, Other Worlds’ Is our home — our solar system — unique among all the systems of stars and their companion planets in the Milky Way galaxy? When compared to other planetary systems, are we that different? How much are we alike? This five-part series of animations and stories looks at some of our intriguing galactic neighbors. Watch and Read ‘Other Stars, Other Worlds’ This artist's concept features the nearby star TRAPPIST-1, an ultra-cool dwarf, with seven Earth-sized planets orbiting it. Two of the planets were discovered in 2016 by TRAPPIST (the Transiting Planets and Planetesimals Small Telescope) in Chile. NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope and several ground-based telescopes uncovered five additional ones. The TRAPPIST-1 system is located about 40 light-years from Earth. NASA/JPL-Caltech Featured Story NASA’s Tally of Planets Outside Our Solar System Reaches 6,000 The milestone highlights the accelerating rate of discoveries, just over three decades since the first exoplanets were found. The official… Read the Story counting our cosmic neighbors ‘We Are Seekers’ — And We Have Confirmed More Than 6,000 Worlds Beyond Our Own The oﬃcial number of exoplanets — planets outside our solar system — confirmed by NASA has reached (and then quickly exceeded) 6,000. The first exoplanet around a Sun-like star was discovered 30 years ago. Since then, the number has rapidly increased as technologies improve. Thousands more candidate planets await confirmation, and each confirmed planet enables scientists to learn more about the conditions under which planets can form, how common planets like Earth might be, and where to look for them. ‘We Are Seekers’: Watch the Video Exoplanet Types So far scientists have categorized exoplanets into the following types: Gas giant, Neptunian, super-Earth, and terrestrial, with subcategories — such as mini-Neptunes — within those groups. How are they alike or different? What makes them special? Learn More about Exoplanet Types Exoplanet Travel Bureau Journey beyond our solar system with guided tours, 360-degree surface visualizations, and our popular travel posters. How Do We Find Exoplanets? Exoplanets are far, but scientists have discovered some creative ways to spot these elusive objects. Want to Help Us Look? NASA welcomes the public to assist with projects and sift through data. Collaborating with NASA scientists, volunteers known as citizen scientists have contributed to thousands of important discoveries. Strange New Worlds Explore an interactive gallery of some of the most intriguing and exotic exoplanets discovered so far. Target Star catalog The Hunt for Habitable Worlds The Target Star Catalog is a guide to intriguing nearby stars that astronomers want to study with future missions, such as the Habitable Worlds Observatory, which will be built specifically to find and observe Earth-like exoplanets, to search for signs of life. Browse the Target Star Catalog An artist's rendering of a red dwarf or M star, with three exoplanets orbiting. About 75 percent of all stars in the sky are the cooler, smaller red dwarfs. NASA/JPL-Caltech 30 Years of Exoplanets 2025 marked 30 years of exoplanet discoveries. The first planet discovered orbiting a Sun-like star, 51 Pegasi b, was identified in October 1995; in the three decades since then, we’ve confirmed 6,000 more, out of billions that we believe exist. The search for and study of exoplanets (extra-solar planets, those found outside our solar system) has grown rapidly in a short time thanks to new detection methods and increased scrutiny from tools ranging from the most advanced spacecraft, such as the James Webb Space Telescope, to ground-based observatories worldwide, and even citizen scientists using backyard telescopes. Learn more about that initial discovery 30 years ago, about the accelerating advances in exoplanet science since then, and about the bold plans for the future of the field, with instruments and observatories to expand and refine the search for other worlds – perhaps even habitable ones like our own. Learn More about 30 Years of Exoplanets otherworldly Encyclopedia Exoplanet Catalog Learn more about every confirmed exoplanet — more than 6,000 and counting — in this continuously updated resource. View interactive 3D models, read descriptions and vital statistics, and filter by exoplanet type, or by the method used to discover it, or by the spacecraft, observatory, or other facility that found it. Browse the Exoplanet Catalog Screenshot of the Eyes on Exoplanets interactive showing an orange gas giant planet KELT-4 A b. NASA Exoplanets 17 Images Go To Gallery Go To Gallery Unable to render the provided source Get set for launch. “Eyes on Exoplanets” will fly you to any planet you wish — as long as it's far beyond our solar system. This fully rendered 3D universe is scientifically accurate, allowing you to zoom in for a close look at more than 6,000 exotic planets known to orbit distant stars. Exoplanet Stories Explore All Exoplanet Stories Article 5 Min Read Newfound ‘Baby’ Planet Smashes Record for Youngest Known World Blog 5 Min Read NASA Activates Roman’s Primary Instrument, Checks Out Coronagraph 2 Min Read NASA Roman’s Planet Imager Has Powered On Blog 1 Min Read NASA Concludes Roman Space Telescope Launch Coverage Blog 2 Min Read NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Flying on Its Own Blog Do NASA Science and Explore Key Questions about the Universe Exoplanet Watch NASA invites people of all ages and backgrounds to participate in authentic NASA research via "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, where volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of important scientific discoveries. As a part of the Exoplanet Watch project, you'll help scientists track and study exoplanets as they transit in front of stars. Get Involved UNITE Do you have your own telescope? You can help observe newly discovered exoplanets and collect information about their transits to help characterize their orbits. UNITE participants coordinate with other citizen scientists and researchers around the globe to track and learn about these new worlds. Learn More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Galaxies Black Holes

Explore This Section Solar System Exploration Join us as we explore our solar system. 08 Planets 05 Dwarf Planets 10 THINGS about our solar system 1. Many Worlds Our solar system has eight planets, and five dwarf planets. 2. Small Worlds, Too About 1.4 million asteroids, and about 4,000 comets are in our solar system. 3. Lots of Moons Our solar system has hundreds of moons. 4. Meet Me in the Milky Way Our solar system is in one of the Milky Way galaxy’s spiral arms called the Orion Spur. 5. A Long Way Around Our solar system takes about 230 million years to orbit the galactic center. 6. Spiraling Through Space The Milky Way is a barred spiral galaxy. 7. Diverse Atmospheres Our solar system has many worlds with many types of atmospheres. 8. Ring Worlds The four giant planets – and at least one asteroid – have rings. 9. Getting Out There More than 300 robotic spacecraft have left Earth's orbit, and 24 U.S. astronauts have traveled to the Moon. 10. Life as We Know It So far, Earth is the only place we've found life in our solar system. Solar System Facts Planets Moons Solar System Facts Our solar system includes the Sun, eight planets, five officially named dwarf planets, hundreds of moons, and thousands of asteroids and comets. Our solar system is located in the Milky Way, a barred spiral galaxy with two major arms, and two minor arms. Our Sun is in a small, partial arm of the Milky Way called the Orion Arm, or Orion Spur, between the Sagittarius and Perseus arms. Our solar system orbits the center of the galaxy at about 515,000 mph (828,000 kph). It takes about 230 million years to complete one orbit around the galactic center. Get the Facts An artist's concept of our solar system. NASA About the Planets Learn about the inner planets, the outer planets, and the dwarf planets. Explore the Planets The eight planets and dwarf planet Pluto. NASA Moons in Our Solar System Our solar system has hundreds of moons, and they come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Many moons orbit planets, and even some asteroids have moons. Explore Moons Hyperion is the largest of Saturn's irregularly shaped moons. NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute the latest in skywatching What’s Up: September 2026 Use the Moon to find Antares and the Teapot, spot brilliant Venus, welcome the equinox, and see the Harvest Moon near Saturn and Neptune. Watch Now Mike Linnihan Solar System News Blog 3 Min Read NASA’s DAVINCI Beats Heat in Preparation for Blistering Venus Descent Article 3 Min Read Embracing the Equinox 5 Min Read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Article 2 Min Read NASA’s Integrated Medical Model (IMM) Article Eyes on the Solar System Unable to render the provided source Eyes of the Solar System uses data and images from NASA missions to give you a simulated view of our solar system. NASA/JPL-Caltech Featured Missions Europa Clipper Europa Clipper launched Oct. 14, 2024, to conduct a detailed investigation of Jupiter's moon Europa. Read More Psyche In August 2029, Psyche will arrive at a metal-rich asteroid with the same name. Read More Lucy Lucy is on the first mission to explore the Jupiter Trojan asteroids. Read More NEO Surveyor NEO Surveyor will hunt asteroids and comets that are potential hazards to Earth. Read More Featured Articles 10 Things: Going Interstellar Read More 10 Things: What's That Space Rock? Read More 10 Things: Our Solar System’s Most Marvelous Moons Read More 10 Things: Greatest Hits – Craters We Love Read More Resources Explore curated collections of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos, animations, handouts, and online interactives. Asteroids and Comets Explore Lucy Mission Explore OSIRIS-REx Explore Ocean Worlds Explore Keep Exploring Discover More Topics Planets Moons Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Oort Cloud

Humans in Space Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 Lands at NASA Kennedy 1 min read NASA astronauts Jessica Watkins and Luke Delaney, CSA (Canadian Space Agency) astronaut Joshua Kutryk, and Roscosmos cosmonaut Sergey Teteryatnikov touched… Sep 26, 2026 Blog NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 On Way to Kennedy 1 min read NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 crew members are on their way to NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida to prepare for launch… Sep 26, 2026 Blog NASA, Boeing to Provide Update on Starliner Development 1 min read During a news conference at 3 p.m. EDT on Monday, Sept. 28, NASA and Boeing leadership will discuss Starliner’s development… Sep 25, 2026 News Release NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 Set for Saturday Arrival at NASA Kennedy 1 min read The crew members of NASA’s SpaceX Crew‑13 mission are set to touch down at the agency’s Kennedy Space Center at approximately… Sep 25, 2026 Blog NASA, SpaceX Proceed Toward Crew-13 Launch 1 min read NASA, SpaceX, and international partners polled “go” to continue preparing for the agency’s Crew‑13 launch to the International Space Station… Sep 25, 2026 Blog Researchers: Help NASA Prevent Blood Clot Formation in Space 3 min read NASA astronaut Anne McClain assists NASA astronaut Jonny Kim with an ultrasound scan aboard the International Space Station. Ultrasound scans… Sep 25, 2026 Topic Crew-13 58 min read NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 members discuss their journeys to becoming astronauts and their upcoming mission to the International Space Station. Episode… Sep 25, 2026 NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 Flight Readiness Review Underway 1 min read NASA and SpaceX managers, along with international partners, are meeting today at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida for the… Sep 25, 2026 Blog NASA Shares SpaceX Crew-14 Assignments for Space Station Mission 4 min read Four crew members from three space agencies will launch to the International Space Station no earlier than spring 2027 for… Sep 24, 2026 Blog News & Articles See All News Article 5 Min Read Human-Related Microbes May Survive Moon’s South Pole, NASA Finds Article 3 Min Read NASA’s LRO Images Falcon 9 Crater on Moon, Learns New Details Article 4 Min Read NASA Selects 2 Instruments for Artemis IV Lunar Surface Science Article 4 Min Read NASA’s Artemis II Lunar Science Operations to Inform Future Missions Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

Earth's Moon The Moon From lighting up our skies to preserving evidence of our solar system’s history, Earth’s closest neighbor plays a pivotal role in the study of our planet and beyond. OBSERVE THE MOON Daily Moon Guide NASA's interactive map for observing the Moon, every day of the year. Next Total Lunar Eclipse Dec 31, 2028 International Observe the Moon Night September 19, 2026 Artemis II Science Lunar science, space weather, astronaut health, and more. Composition Atmosphere Craters Phases Formation Water Moon Composition & Structure Like Earth, the Moon consists of three main layers: a crust, a mantle, and a core. Billions of years ago, the Moon was a molten world. As it solidified, the heaviest materials (metals like iron) sank down into the Moon’s center, and the lighter materials (lower density rocks) rose towards the surface. The result is a structure a bit like a chocolate-dipped cherry – solid core, mostly solid/partly liquid mantle, and thin outer crust. Go Does the Moon Have an Atmosphere? Yes, but just barely. In contrast to Earth’s thick layers of air, the Moon’s exosphere is a bit like the haze you get when you whack a dirty rug with a broom: it includes a sampling of particles knocked free by impact. But instead of a rug, these particles come from the lunar surface. Instead of flying through the air, they’re ejected into near-emptiness. And instead of a broom, the Moon is pummeled by space debris. Go Earthrise photographed by Apollo 8 astronaut William Anders, December 1968, with Earth at gibbous phase as seen from the Moon. NASA Lunar Craters Earth's Moon is covered in craters. Lunar craters tell us the history not only of the Moon, but of other worlds, too. On the Moon, where there’s no liquid water or wind, evidence of our solar system's impact history has been preserved for billions of years. Go Pierazzo crater imaged by NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter. It is located within the north-northwestern extent of ejecta surrounding the Orientale impact basin. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Moon Phases Earth's view of the half-sunlit Moon shifts throughout the month. As our perspective changes, we observe a pattern known as lunar phases: new moon, waxing crescent, first quarter, waxing gibbous, full moon, waning gibbous, third quarter, and waning crescent. How it works Composite image showing the cycle of Moon phases. How Did the Moon Form? Earth’s Moon was born out of destruction. There are several theories about our Moon’s formation, but almost all share this point in common. Our early solar system was the scene of violent smashups that could end in obliteration or new, larger objects. Those mashed-together objects make up the planets, moons, asteroids and other solar system objects we know today. Go Earth’s Moon is thought to have formed in a tremendous collision. NASA Uncovering Lunar Water There’s water on the Moon. Ancient ice hidden deep in permanently shadowed craters. H20 molecules on the sunlit lunar surface. Humanity's search for water on the Moon began hundreds of years ago. Here's a brief history of discoveries leading up to the confirmation of its presence. Go Areas of the Moon’s south pole with possible deposits of water ice, shown in blue. The map is based on data taken by NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter. NASA COMING UP September 19: Observe the Moon with NASA You're invited to International Observe the Moon Night! Join our worldwide community in celebrating Earth's Moon through direct observations, hands-on activities, lunar-themed music, artwork, readings, and more. Go Features Moon Dust We can learn a lot from studying Moon dust—and, the Moon's powdery surface presents challenges for human and robotic explorers. Read More Lunar Volcanism The Moon does not have erupting volcanoes today, but it was once flooded with flowing lava. Read More The Moon & Tides As distant as the Moon may seem, its gravitational pull plays a huge role in the formation of Earth's ocean tides. Read More Featured Video Moon Phases 2026 This visualization shows the Moon's phase and libration at hourly intervals throughout 2026, as viewed from the Northern Hemisphere. About Moon Phases Moon Stories Explore All Moon Stories Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater News Release 2 Min Read NASA Invites Media to International Observe the Moon Night Article 3 Min Read Celebrate International Observe the Moon Night with NASA Article 6 Min Read NASA, IBM Launch AI Foundation Model for Lunar Science 3 Min Read What’s Up: September 2026 Skywatching Tips from NASA Article 5 Min Read Human-Related Microbes May Survive Moon’s South Pole, NASA Finds Article 3 Min Read NASA’s LRO Images Falcon 9 Crater on Moon, Learns New Details Article 1 Min Read 2026 Total Solar Eclipse in Spain Image Article EXPLORATION X Science The Science of Artemis The Moon is a 4.5-billion-year-old time capsule, pristinely preserved by the cold vacuum of space. Artemis II carried its crew farther from Earth and closer to the Moon than any human has been in over half a century. The astronauts on board were both scientists and subjects as they flew around the far side of the Moon and back. Learn More EXPLORATION X Science The Science of Artemis Observe the Moon Daily Moon Guide NASA’s interactive map for observing the Moon each day of the year. Moon Observation Journal Spend the next month getting to know the Moon. International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Learn more and see how people around the world #ObserveTheMoon together. Lunar Melt Mappers Help NASA map the Moon's molten flows with Lunar Melt, a citizen science project. Anyone with access to a computer can join in! Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture. Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics. Skywatching

Explore This Section Dwarf Planets Our solar system has five dwarf planets. In order of distance from the Sun they are: Ceres, Pluto, Haumea, Makemake, and Eris. Dwarf Planets Overview Pluto and other dwarf planets are a lot like regular planets. So what’s the big difference? The International Astronomical Union (IAU), a world organization of astronomers, came up with the definition of a planet in 2006. According to the IAU, a planet must do three things: Orbit its host star (In our solar system that’s the Sun). Be mostly round. Be big enough that its gravity cleared away any other objects of similar size near its orbit around the Sun. Dwarf planets like Pluto were defined as objects that orbit the Sun, and are nearly round, but have not been able to clear their orbit of debris. So far, the IAU has only recognized five dwarf planets. In order of distance from the Sun they are: Ceres, Pluto, Haumea, Makemake, and Eris. But the IAU says there may be many more dwarf planets – perhaps more than a hundred – waiting to be discovered. DWARF PLANETS Ceres Ceres is the only dwarf planet located in the inner solar system. Pluto Pluto was long considered our solar system's ninth planet. Haumea Haumea is one of the fastest rotating large objects in our solar system. Makemake Makemake is the second-brightest object in the Kuiper Belt. Eris Eris is one of the largest known dwarf planets in our solar system. Pluto: The Star of Dwarf Planets Pluto is by far the most famous dwarf planet. Discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, Pluto was long considered our solar system's ninth planet. But after other astronomers found similar intriguing worlds deeper in the distant Kuiper Belt – the IAU reclassified Pluto as a dwarf planet in 2006. An image showing signs supporting dwarf planets. There was widespread outrage on behalf of the demoted planet. Textbooks were updated, and the internet spawned memes with Pluto going through a range of emotions, from anger to loneliness. On July 14, 2015, NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft made its historic flight through the Pluto system – providing the first close-up images of Pluto and its moons and collecting other data that has transformed our understanding of these mysterious worlds on the solar system’s outer frontier. Dwarf planet Ceres is closer to home. Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, and it's the only dwarf planet located in the inner solar system. Like Pluto, Ceres also was once classified as a planet. Ceres was the first dwarf planet to be visited by a spacecraft – NASA’s Dawn mission . Learn More Dwarf Planet Resources A curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, printable graphics, and 3D models. NASA Photojournal: Dwarf Planets Catalog of images, videos, and animations of Dwarf Planets. Solar System News Blog 3 Min Read NASA’s DAVINCI Beats Heat in Preparation for Blistering Venus Descent Article 3 Min Read Embracing the Equinox Article 5 Min Read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Hypothetical Planet X Caltech researchers have found evidence suggesting there may be a "Planet X" deep in the solar system. Exoplanets

Explore This Section Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Our solar system's small bodies pack outsized intrigue Asteroids Rocky leftovers from planet formation. Comets Cosmic snowballs of gas and dust. Meteors AKA "shooting stars," the spectacle of debris falling and burning through the atmosphere. Planetary Defense Protect Earth from impacts. Overview Asteroids, comets, and meteoroids are chunks of rock, ice, and metal left over from the formation of our solar system about 4.6 billion years ago. Get the latest count of asteroids and comets Asteroid News More NASA News Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Blog 6 Min Read NASA’s Psyche Mission Delivers Mars Flyby Data, Time-lapse Video 5 Min Read NASA Study Finds Near-Earth Asteroid Is Actually Comet Article 6 Min Read NASA Study of Pristine Meteorite Adds to Story of Ancient Asteroids Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Perseverance Rover Reads Record of Ancient Mars Impacts Article Eyes on Asteroids Unable to render the provided source Explore the 3D world of asteroids, comets, and NEOs. Learn about past and future missions, tracking and predicting orbits, and close approaches to Earth. NASA/JPL-Caltech Featured Asteroid Missions Lucy Lucy launched Oct. 16, 2021, on a mission to explore a record-breaking number of asteroids, including Trojan asteroids. Read More Psyche In August 2029, Psyche will arrive at a metal-rich asteroid with the same name. Read More OSIRIS-APEX OSIRIS-APEX will study changes to asteroid Apophis after the asteroid’s rare close encounter with Earth in 2029. Read More NEO Surveyor NEO Surveyor will hunt asteroids and comets that are potential hazards to Earth. Launch is no earlier than 2027. Read More Asteroid and Comet Resources Explore this page for a curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, handouts, and online interactives. This resource package is suitable for educators, students, and anyone interested in learning more about asteroids and comets! Learn More A pair of stereoscopic images of the asteroid Dinkinesh and its satellite, Selam, created using data collected by the L’LORRI camera on NASA's Lucy spacecraft in the minutes around closest approach on Nov. 1, 2023. NASA/Goddard/SwRI/Johns Hopkins APL/NOIRLab for the original images/Brian May/Claudia Manzoni for stereo processing of the images. More Resources Lucy Mission Resource Package Activities that can be done at home as well as videos, animations, stories, and articles. For Kids: Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Facts and activities for K-4 explorers. NASA Photojournal: Small Bodies Catalog of images, videos, and animations of asteroids and comets. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Pluto Kuiper Belt Oort Cloud Skywatching

Explore This Section The Kuiper Belt The Kuiper Belt is a doughnut-shaped region of icy objects beyond the orbit of Neptune. It is home to Pluto and most of the known dwarf planets and some comets. Facts Exploration Kuiper Belt Facts The Kuiper Belt is a large, doughnut-shaped region of icy bodies extending far beyond the orbit of Neptune. The Kuiper Belt is home to Pluto and Arrokoth. Both worlds were visited by NASA's New Horizons spacecraft. There may be millions of other icy worlds in the Kuiper Belt that were left over from the formation of our solar system. Get the Facts These two multiple-exposure images from Hubble show Kuiper Belt Objects against a background of stars in the constellation Sagittarius. The two KBOs are roughly 4 billion miles from Earth. NASA, ESA, SwRI, JHU/APL, New Horizons KBO Search Team Kuiper Belt Exploration Most of what we know about the Kuiper Belt comes from ground-based telescopes and the Hubble Space Telescope . Only one spacecraft has visited the Kuiper Belt. NASA’s New Horizons flew past Pluto in July 2015 – sending back the first clear, close-up images of the tiny world. On Jan. 1, 2019, the spacecraft flew by a Kuiper Belt object later named Arrokoth . Explore the Kuiper Belt The Hubble Space Telescope floats above Earth after being released from space shuttle Columbia’s robot arm at the conclusion of a servicing mission in March 2002. NASA Featured Story NASA’s Hubble Finds Kuiper Belt Duo May Be Trio The puzzle of predicting how three gravitationally bound bodies move in space has challenged mathematicians for centuries, and has most… Read the Story Unable to render the provided source Explore our solar system with NASA's Eyes on the Solar System. NASA/JPL-Caltech/VTAD Kuiper Belt 14 Images Go To Gallery Go To Gallery News From NASA Image Article 1 Min Read APOD: 2026 September 27 – Andromeda Before and After Photoshop Blog 1 Min Read NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 Lands at NASA Kennedy 1 Min Read NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 On Way to Kennedy Blog 1 Min Read APOD: 2026 September 26 – Mirrored Meteor and Milky Way Image Article 1 Min Read NASA, Boeing to Provide Update on Starliner Development News Release Learn more For Kids: About the Kuiper Belt Just outside of Neptune’s orbit is a ring of icy bodies. We call it the Kuiper Belt. It’s pronounced "ky-purr." Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Oort Cloud Pluto Skywatching Asteroids, Comets & Meteors

Explore This Section Oort Cloud Scientists think the Oort Cloud is a giant spherical shell surrounding our solar system. Facts Multimedia Oort Cloud Facts The Oort Cloud lies far beyond Pluto and the most distant edges of the Kuiper Belt. Scientists think the Oort Cloud is a giant spherical shell surrounding the Sun, planets and Kuiper Belt Objects. It's like a big, thick bubble around our solar system, made of icy, comet-like objects. Get the Facts An infrared view of Oort Cloud Comet C/2006 W3 (Christensen) taken by NASA's NEOWISE spacecraft. NEOWISE observed the comet on April 20th, 2010, when it was nearly 370 million miles (600 million kilometers) from Earth. NASA Oort Cloud Illustrations The Oort Cloud lies far beyond Pluto and the most distant edges of the Kuiper Belt. Because it is so far away, NASA doesn't have direct images of the Oort Cloud. Get Multimedia An artist's concept of our solar system including the Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud. Solar System News Latest NASA News Blog 3 Min Read NASA’s DAVINCI Beats Heat in Preparation for Blistering Venus Descent Article 3 Min Read Embracing the Equinox 5 Min Read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Article 2 Min Read NASA’s Integrated Medical Model (IMM) Article Learn More For Kids: About the Oort Cloud Explore more about the Oort Cloud Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt Skywatching Pluto

Explore This Section Are We Alone? Contents Just Getting Started More Questions than Answers Where Is Everybody? Just Getting Started The search for life beyond Earth is really just getting started, but science has an encouraging early answer: there are plenty of planets in the galaxy, many with similarities to our own. But what we don’t know fills volumes. Observations from the ground and from space have confirmed thousands of planets beyond our solar system . Our galaxy likely holds at least 100 billion. But so far, we have no evidence of life beyond Earth. Is life in the cosmos easily begun, and commonplace? Or is it incredibly rare? How big is the Milky Way galaxy? Make the jump to light-years as we cruise through our galaxy. Video NASA/JPL-Caltech More Questions than Answers In the thousands of years humanity has been contemplating the cosmos, we are the first people to know one thing for sure: The stars beyond our Sun are teeming with planets . They come in many varieties, and a good chunk of them are around the size of Earth . Like most scientific questions, though, getting an answer to this one just breeds more questions: Which, if any, of these exoplanets harbors some form of life? How quickly does life get its start? And how long does it last? This artist's concept allows us to imagine what it would be like to stand on the surface of the exoplanet TRAPPIST-1f, located in the TRAPPIST-1 system in the constellation Aquarius, as of Feb 2017. Where Is Everybody? The universe's eerie silence has its own name – the "Fermi paradox." Physicist Enrico Fermi famously posed the question: "Where is everybody?" Even at slow travel speeds, the universe's billions of years of existence allow plenty of time for intelligent, technological lifeforms to traverse the galaxy. Why, then, is the cosmos so quiet? Meanwhile, exoplanet discoveries over the past two decades have filled in a few of the terms in the much-debated Drake Equation – a chain of numbers that might one day tell us how many intelligent civilizations we can expect to find. Most of its terms remain blank – the fraction of planets with life, with intelligent life, with detectable technology – but the equation itself suggests we might one day arrive at an answer. It feels at least a little more hopeful than Fermi's silence. We stand at a crossroads in the search for life. We've found thousands of planets in our Milky Way galaxy, a large fraction of them in Earth's size range and orbiting in their stars' "habitable zones" – the distance from the star at which liquid water could exist on the surface. We know the galaxy likely holds trillions of planets. Our telescopes in space and on the ground, and our remote-sensing technology, grow ever more powerful. Yet so far, the only life we know of is right here at home. For the moment, we're staring into the void, hoping someone is staring back. Revised Drake equation. University of Rochester Next: We don't have a universally accepted definition of life itself, so can we find life? Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore the Universe Star Basics Contents Birth Life Death Astronomers estimate that the universe could contain up to one septillion stars – that’s a one followed by 24 zeros. Our Milky Way alone contains more than 100 billion, including our most well-studied star, the Sun. Stars are giant balls of hot gas – mostly hydrogen, with some helium and small amounts of other elements. Every star has its own life cycle, ranging from a few million to trillions of years, and its properties change as it ages. Birth Stars form in large clouds of gas and dust called molecular clouds. Molecular clouds range from 1,000 to 10 million times the mass of the Sun and can span as much as hundreds of light-years. Molecular clouds are cold which causes gas to clump, creating high-density pockets. Some of these clumps can collide with each other or collect more matter, strengthening their gravitational force as their mass grows. Eventually, gravity causes some of these clumps to collapse. When this happens, friction causes the material to heat up, which eventually leads to the development of a protostar – a baby star. Batches of stars that have recently formed from molecular clouds are often called stellar clusters, and molecular clouds full of stellar clusters are called stellar nurseries. The edge of a nearby stellar nursery called NGC 3324, found at the northwest corner of the Carina Nebula, forms the “mountains” and “valleys” spanning this image captured by the James Webb Space Telescope. NASA, ESA, CSA, and STScI Life At first, most of the protostar’s energy comes from heat released by its initial collapse. After millions of years, immense pressures and temperatures in the star’s core squeeze the nuclei of hydrogen atoms together to form helium, a process called nuclear fusion. Nuclear fusion releases energy, which heats the star and prevents it from further collapsing under the force of gravity. Our Sun, a main sequence star, emits a strong solar flare flashes in this image captured by NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory. NASA/SDO Astronomers call stars that are stably undergoing nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium main sequence star s . This is the longest phase of a star’s life. The star’s luminosity, size, and temperature will slowly change over millions or billions of years during this phase. Our Sun is roughly midway through its main sequence stage. A star’s gas provides its fuel, and its mass determines how rapidly it runs through its supply, with lower-mass stars burning longer, dimmer, and cooler than very massive stars. More massive stars must burn fuel at a higher rate to generate the energy that keeps them from collapsing under their own weight. Some low-mass stars will shine for trillions of years – longer than the universe has currently existed – while some massive stars will live for only a few million years. Death At the beginning of the end of a star’s life, its core runs out of hydrogen to convert into helium. The energy produced by fusion creates pressure inside the star that balances gravity’s tendency to pull matter together, so the core starts to collapse. But squeezing the core also increases its temperature and pressure, making the star slowly puff up. However, the details of the late stages of the star’s death depend strongly on its mass. A low-mass star’s atmosphere will keep expanding until it becomes a subgiant or giant star while fusion converts helium into carbon in the core. (This will be the fate of our Sun, in several billion years.) Some giants become unstable and pulsate, periodically inflating and ejecting some of their atmospheres. Eventually, all the star’s outer layers blow away, creating an expanding cloud of dust and gas called a planetary nebula. The Helix nebula, imaged here, lies 650 light-years away in the constellation Aquarius. Also known as NGC 7293, it is a typical example of planetary nebulae. NASA/JPL-Caltech All that’s left of the star is its core, now called a white dwarf, a roughly Earth-sized stellar cinder that gradually cools over billions of years. A high-mass star goes further. Fusion converts carbon into heavier elements like oxygen, neon, and magnesium, which will become future fuel for the core. For the largest stars, this chain continues until silicon fuses into iron. These processes produce energy that keeps the core from collapsing, but each new fuel buys it less and less time. The whole process takes just a few million years. By the time silicon fuses into iron, the star runs out of fuel in a matter of days. The next step would be fusing iron into some heavier element but doing so requires energy instead of releasing it. The remnant of a supernova observed in 1572, notably studied by the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, lies about 13,000 light-years away in the constellation Cassiopeia. In this composite image, data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory have been combined with an optical image of stars in the same area. X-ray: NASA/CXC/RIKEN & GSFC/T. Sato et al; Optical: DSS The star’s iron core collapses until forces between the nuclei push the brakes, then it rebounds. This change creates a shock wave that travels outward through the star. The result is a huge explosion called a supernova. The core survives as an incredibly dense remnant, either a neutron star or a black hole . Material cast into the cosmos by supernovae and other stellar events will enrich future molecular clouds and become incorporated into the next generation of stars. Star Stories Explore All Star Stories Article 5 Min Read NASA-JAXA XRISM Mission Sees Pulsar Gathering Companion’s ‘Wind’ Article 5 Min Read Newfound ‘Baby’ Planet Smashes Record for Youngest Known World 5 Min Read NASA Activates Roman’s Primary Instrument, Checks Out Coronagraph Blog 5 Min Read NASA’s Webb Reveals Dynamic Panorama of Star Formation Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Spies Superbubble Scene Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Universe Galaxies Black Holes Exoplanets

Explore the Universe Galaxy Basics Galaxies consist of stars, planets, and vast clouds of gas and dust, all bound together by gravity. The largest contain trillions of stars and can be more than a million light-years across. The smallest can contain a few thousand stars and span just a few hundred light-years. Most large galaxies have supermassive black holes at their centers, some with billions of times the Sun’s mass. Galaxies come in a variety of shapes, mostly spirals and ellipticals, as well as those with less orderly appearances, usually dubbed irregular. Most galaxies are between 10 billion and 13.6 billion years old. Some are almost as old as the universe itself, which formed around 13.8 billion years ago. Astronomers think the youngest known galaxy formed approximately 500 million years ago. Galaxies can organize into groups of about 100 or fewer members held together by their mutual gravity. Larger structures, called clusters, may contain thousands of galaxies. Groups and clusters can be arranged in superclusters, which are not gravitationally bound. Superclusters, empty voids, “walls” of galaxies, and other large-scale structures make up the cosmic web of matter in the universe. Our Milky Way Our home galaxy is called the Milky Way. It’s a spiral galaxy with a disk of stars spanning more than 100,000 light-years. Earth is located along one of the galaxy’s spiral arms, about halfway from the center. Our solar system takes about 240 million years to orbit the Milky Way just once. This illustration shows the Milky Way, our home galaxy. NASA/JPL-Caltech From our perspective on Earth, the Milky Way looks like a faint, milky band of light arcing across the entire sky, which is how it got its name. This feature marks the central disk of our home galaxy seen edge on. The Milky Way sits in a neighborhood with over 50 other galaxies called the Local Group. Its members range in size from dwarf galaxies (smaller galaxies with up to a few billion stars) to Andromeda, our nearest large galactic neighbor. The Local Group sits just off the edge of the Virgo cluster and is part of the Laniakea supercluster. Galaxies Stories Explore All Galaxy Stories Image Article 1 Min Read Hubble Spots Chaotic Secret in Galaxy Article 2 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Seeks Lensed Supernova, Marks 200,000 Orbits 1 Min Read NASA’s Chandra Finds Unusual Objects in Pinwheel Galaxy Image Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Spots an Out-of-Sync Galaxy Article 5 Min Read NASA Activates Roman’s Primary Instrument, Checks Out Coronagraph Blog Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Universe Black Holes Stars Exoplanets

Explore the Universe Black Hole Basics Black Holes Black holes are among the most mysterious cosmic objects, much studied but not fully understood. These objects aren’t really holes. They’re huge concentrations of matter packed into very tiny spaces. A black hole is so dense that gravity just beneath its surface, the event horizon, is strong enough that nothing – not even light – can escape. The event horizon isn’t a surface like Earth’s or even the Sun’s. It’s a boundary that contains all the matter that makes up the black hole. There is much we don’t know about black holes, like what matter looks like inside their event horizons. However, there is a lot that scientists do know about black holes. This artist’s concept portrays the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, known as Sagittarius A* (A-star). It’s surrounded by a swirling accretion disk of hot gas. The black hole’s gravity bends light from the far side of the disk, making it appear to wrap above and below the black hole. Several flaring hot spots that resemble solar flares, but on a more energetic scale, are seen in the disk. NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has detected both bright flares and fainter flickers coming from Sagittarius A*. The flickers are so rapid they must originate very close to the black hole. Illustration: NASA, ESA, CSA, Ralf Crawford (STScI) Finding Black Holes Black holes don’t emit or reflect light, making them effectively invisible to telescopes. Scientists primarily detect and study them based on how they affect their surroundings: Black holes can be surrounded by rings of gas and dust, called accretion disks, that emit light across many wavelengths, including X-rays. A supermassive black hole’s intense gravity can cause stars to orbit around it in a particular way. Astronomers tracked the orbits of several stars near the center of the Milky Way to prove it houses a supermassive black hole, a discovery that won the 2020 Nobel Prize. When very massive objects accelerate through space, they create ripples in the fabric of space-time called gravitational waves. Scientists can detect some of these by the ripples’ effect on detectors. Massive objects like black holes can bend and distort light from more distant objects. This effect, called gravitational lensing, can be used to find isolated black holes that are otherwise invisible. Black Holes Are Not ... Wormholes. They don’t provide shortcuts between different points in space, or portals to other dimensions or universes. Cosmic vacuum cleaners. Black holes don’t suck in other matter. From far enough away, their gravitational effects are just like those of other objects of the same mass. Black holes - what are they really? Learn this and more with “Astro-Investigates,” the video series that explores and explains big astrophysics topics with the help of NASA scientists. NASA Essential Black Hole Facts 01 Closest The nearest known black hole, called Gaia BH1, is about 1,500 light-years away. 02 Farthest The most distant black hole detected, at the center of a galaxy called QSO J0313-1806, is around 13 billion light-years away. 03 Biggest The most massive black hole observed, TON 618, tips the scales at 66 billion times the Sun’s mass. 04 Smallest The lightest-known black hole is only 3.8 times the Sun’s mass. It’s paired up with a star. 05 Spaghettification A real term that describes what happens when matter gets too close to a black hole. It’s squeezed horizontally and stretched vertically, resembling a noodle. 06 Spin All black holes spin. The fastest-known – named GRS 1915+105 – clocks in at over 1,000 rotations per second. 07 Particle accelerators Monster black holes at the centers of galaxies can launch particles to near light speed. 08 Gravity's the same If you replaced the Sun with a black hole of the same mass, the solar system would get a lot colder, but the planets would stay in their orbits. 09 Star booms One type of black hole is born when massive stars run out of fuel and explode in supernovae. 10 Not so rare Most Milky Way-sized galaxies have monster black holes at their centers. Our is called Sagittarius A* (pronounced ey-star), and it’s 4 million times the Sun’s mass. An illustration of a quasar. The colors depicted in this illustration are for artistic purposes only. NASA Black Hole News Explore All Black Hole News Article 1 Min Read 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 22 Min Read Roman Series: Why NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Make Unexpected Discoveries 6 Min Read NASA’s Swift Sees ‘Wandering’ Mega Black Hole Shredding Star Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Roman Telescope Will Spot Distant Black Holes That Shred Stars Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Discovers First of Star Cluster’s Missing Black Holes Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Universe Galaxies Stars Exoplanets

Explore the Universe Explore Cosmic History Study how the universe evolved, learn about the fundamental forces , and discover what the cosmos is made of. Overview The origin, evolution, and nature of the universe have fascinated and confounded humankind for centuries. New ideas and major discoveries made during the 20th century transformed cosmology – the term for the way we conceptualize and study the universe – although much remains unknown. Learn more The origin, evolution, and nature of the universe have fascinated and confounded humankind for centuries. New ideas and major discoveries made during the 20th century transformed cosmology – the term for the way we conceptualize and study the universe – although much remains unknown. Quick Facts The cosmic microwave background is the oldest light we can observe in the universe. The universe's first stars were 30 to 300 times more massive than our Sun and millions of times brighter. Big Bang Stories Explore All Big Bang Stories 18 Min Read Cosmic Dawn with Nobel Laureate John Mather Article 6 Min Read Cosmic Mapmaker: NASA’s SPHEREx Space Telescope Ready to Launch 24 Min Read The Mind-Bending Math Inside Black Holes 6 Min Read How NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Illuminate Cosmic Dawn Article 11 Min Read What is Dark Energy? Inside our accelerating, expanding Universe Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Dark Matter & Dark Energy Galaxies Stars Black Holes

Explore the Universe Dark Matter Contents What is Dark Matter? Discovering Dark Matter Studying Dark Matter Taking Dark Matter's Temperature Leading Dark Matter Candidates Dark Matter Versus Dark Energy What is Dark Matter? Dark matter is the invisible glue that holds the universe together. This mysterious material is all around us, making up most of the matter in the universe. But what exactly is dark matter? That's a question that scientists have been trying to solve for almost 100 years. Dark matter makes up most of the mass in galaxies and galaxy clusters. In fact, scientists estimate that ordinary matter makes up only about 5% of the universe, while dark matter makes up about 27%. (The rest is thought to be dark energy , which is its own mystery). It's thought that dark matter shapes the cosmos, organizing galaxies and cosmic objects on a large scale. The universe is made up of three components: normal or visible matter (5%), dark matter (27%), and dark energy (68%). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center From stars and galaxies to the shoes on your feet, ordinary matter makes up everything we can see in the universe — in wavelengths spanning from the infrared to visible light and gamma rays. While dark matter interacts with ordinary matter through gravity, it does not seem to interact at all with the electromagnetic spectrum, including visible light. So dark matter doesn't absorb, reflect, or emit any light. While dark matter is invisible, it does have some things in common with ordinary matter: It takes up space and it holds mass. Because of this, we can see how it interacts with and influences ordinary matter throughout the universe, which is how we're able to "see" and study dark matter. So, what can we see? And what have we seen that makes us so sure that dark matter exists ? The massive, spacetime-warping cluster of galaxies shown here in this image from NASA's Hubble Space Telescope is Abell 209, located 2.8 billion light-years away in the constellation Cetus. Abell 209’s galaxies are separated by millions of light-years, and the seemingly empty space between the galaxies is filled with hot, diffuse gas that is visible only at X-ray wavelengths. An even more elusive occupant of this galaxy cluster is dark matter. The immense mass of a galaxy cluster can bend the fabric of spacetime itself and create warped and magnified images of background galaxies and stars in a process called gravitational lensing. While this image lacks the dramatic rings that gravitational lensing can sometimes create, Abell 209 still shows subtle signs of lensing at work, in the form of streaky, slightly curved galaxies within the cluster’s golden glow. By measuring the distortion of these galaxies, astronomers can map the distribution of mass within the cluster, illuminating the underlying cloud of dark matter. ESA/Hubble & NASA, M. Postman, P. Kelly Discovering Dark Matter It might seem impossible to discover something that can't be seen, but scientists have been trying to untangle the mystery of dark matter since at least the 1930s. It was during this time that astronomers observed what seemed to be "missing matter" in galaxies. While the term dark matter was mentioned in earlier publications, the current concept of dark matter materialized in the early 1930s. In 1933, Swiss-born astronomer Fritz Zwicky published a paper in which he described an anomaly he observed studying a cluster of galaxies known as the Coma Cluster. He noticed that the galaxies in the cluster moved too quickly for the gravity created by its observed ordinary matter. The galaxies should have been escaping the cluster, but instead, they were staying together. After noting this discrepancy, Zwicky suggested that there might be an invisible form of matter that created the gravity holding these galaxies together. He dubbed this mysterious material "dunkle Materie," which is German for dark matter. While these early investigations sparked ideas and curiosity around dark matter, it was still seen as a fringe concept without sufficient evidence to support it. That changed in the 1970s when American astronomer Vera Rubin observed this "missing matter" problem in spiral galaxies. Rubin looked at the stars on the outer edges of the spirals. To explain why these stars moved as fast as they did without flying into intergalactic space, there had to be a large amount of matter holding them in place. But, not seeing any of this matter, Rubin concluded that these galaxies must be held together by dark matter. Rubin's discovery provided such strong evidence for dark matter that the concept was embraced by the scientific community. Today, while not all astronomers agree on what dark matter might be, its existence is widely accepted. Studying Dark Matter Today, scientists have even more direct evidence of dark matter. While dark matter doesn't interact with light, its gravity can bend light from distant galaxies, creating an effect called gravitational lensing. Studying galaxies distorted by gravitational lensing can help scientists better understand dark matter and its place in the universe. Thousands of glimmering galaxies are bound together by their own gravity, making up a massive cluster formally classified as MACS J1423. The largest bright white oval is a supergiant elliptical galaxy and the dominant member of this galaxy cluster. The galaxy cluster acts like a... Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI, Christopher Willott (NRC-Canada), Lamiya Mowla (Wellesley College), Kartheik Iyer (Columbia) In 2006, scientists observed the Bullet Cluster and discovered some of the best direct evidence for dark matter. This galaxy cluster, formally known as 1E 0657-56, was created when two large galaxy clusters collided in an extremely energetic event about 3.8 billion light-years from Earth. During this collision, hot gas from one cluster interacted with hot gas from the other. In the image below, hot X-ray emitting gas made of normal matter and detected by NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory is shown in pink. The blue portions show the distribution of dark matter and were revealed using gravitational lensing observations taken by NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope and the Giant Magellan Telescope, which is operated by an international consortium. The blue areas represent most of the mass in these clusters and are distributed differently than the hot gas. Researchers think that this material is likely dark matter. So, in this image, you can see direct evidence of dark matter with your own eyes. This composite image captured using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra X-ray Observatory and the ground-based Magellan Telescope shows the Bullet Cluster, a pair of galaxy clusters that collided. Normal matter is shown in the cluster in pink, while gravitational lensing reveals dark matter in the cluster shown in blue. This observation has provided one of the clearest direct examples of dark matter. X-ray: NASA/CXC/CfA/M.Markevitch, Optical and lensing map: NASA/STScI, Magellan/U.Arizona/D.Clowe, Lensing map: ESO WFI With sufficient evidence to support dark matter's existence, scientists are working hard to explore not only what dark matter is but also where it's distributed throughout the universe. Since dark matter is essentially the glue holding the universe together, a better understanding of the distribution of dark matter will help answer big cosmic questions about how the universe is organized and how it has changed over the course of cosmic history. Maps showing the distribution of dark matter — created with the help of missions like NASA’s upcoming Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope — will help scientists answer these questions and continue to piece together the strange, true history of our universe. Taking Dark Matter's Temperature Because dark matter has mass, it also must have a temperature. For a while, scientists considered two options — cold dark matter made up of slow-moving particles and warm or hot dark matter made of faster-moving particles. In simulations, scientists modeled how our universe would operate if dark matter was cold and slow versus if it was hot or warm and fast. They showed that with cold dark matter, the universe’s structures appear to exist and move as they are observed in reality. When the simulations were done with warm or hot dark matter, however, cosmic structures don't seem able to stick together and can't exist in the ways we observe. Based on such simulations, scientists currently agree that it is most likely that whatever dark matter is, it is cold or slow-moving. It's additionally thought that this cold dark matter formed in the early universe with a low enough velocity to allow galaxies to form and distribute as we see them today. Leading Dark Matter Candidates There are currently many proposed explanations for what makes up dark matter. In fact, scientists think it's possible that dark matter is made up of more than one kind of matter or particle. Below are a few of the current candidates with the most support from the scientific community. For context, scientists have been searching for these candidates but have not yet found evidence which would confirm any candidate. New candidates may also continue to emerge. WIMPs (Weakly Interacting Massive Particles) WIMPs are hypothetical particles that are big, heavy, and slow-moving. They don't absorb or emit light or strongly interact with any other particles that we've seen so far. Scientists think WIMPs interact with gravity and possibly other forces, but in a way that allows these particles to pass through normal matter almost seamlessly. When WIMPs interact with each other, however, they may cancel each other out. That destruction could produce gamma rays. Scientists have even searched through data from NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope to look for signatures of WIMPs interacting and annihilating one another. WIMPs, or Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, represent a favored class of dark matter candidates. Some WIMPs may mutually annihilate when pairs of them interact, a process expected to produce gamma rays — the most energetic form of light. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Axions Axions are hypothetical subatomic particles scientists think are both low-mass and low-energy. This particle was first theorized in 1977 as a solution to a fundamental problem within particle physics called the strong CP problem. (CP stands for charge conjugation symmetry and parity symmetry.) In essence, the problem is that when regular matter particles are inverted or swapped with antimatter particles, the laws of physics should remain the same, and the particles should be symmetrical and cancel out. This would mean that in the first moments of the universe, matter and antimatter should have canceled each other out. But that didn't happen. Scientists proposed axions as a hypothetical particle that could solve the strong CP problem by violating this symmetry to allow regular matter to flourish. Scientists think that these hypothetical particles could be dark matter and have found additional evidence for the existence of axions over the years. Scientists have also used data from NASA telescopes including Fermi, Chandra, and NuSTAR (Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array) to search for evidence of axion oscillations in X-ray and gamma-ray observations. Primordial black holes Black holes are the densest objects in the universe with gravity so extreme that at a certain point not even light can escape. Primordial black holes are hypothetical black holes scientists think formed right after the birth of the universe. Primordial black holes could be as small as an atom or as large as a supermassive black hole, with possible masses ranging from 100,000 times less massive than a paperclip to 100,000 times more massive than the Sun. Recent studies suggest a primordial black hole could travel through our solar system once every 10 years, which may allow scientists to eventually study them directly. One theory, proposed by physicist Stephen Hawking, suggests that after primordial black holes formed from regular matter at the start of the universe, they collapsed, becoming dark matter that spread out across the universe. Scientists use data from Fermi to search for primordial black hole evaporation. Dark Matter Versus Dark Energy Dark matter often causes confusion because of its name. Dark matter is not a dark color. Rather, it's called “dark” because it's invisible to us since it doesn't absorb, reflect, or emit any light. Another misconception about dark matter relates to dark energy. While the two are both cosmic mysteries with "dark" in their name, they are not the same thing. Dark matter is a mysterious type of matter that holds galaxies together. Dark energy is the name scientists have given to whatever is causing our universe to expand at an accelerating rate over time — another cosmic mystery. Dark energy isn't concentrated in galaxies or galaxy clusters, instead scientists think it’s spread throughout the universe. Both dark matter and dark energy pose deep, unanswered questions about the universe. Although they are distinct phenomena, scientists map the distribution of dark matter to help us understand the universe's accelerated expansion which is caused by dark energy. By Chelsea Gohd NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory Dark Matter Stories 22 Min Read Encore: Welcome to the Dark Side Article 1 Min Read 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 22 Min Read Roman Series: Why NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Make Unexpected Discoveries 29 Min Read Roman Series: The Technology Inside NASA’s Newest Space Telescope 1 Min Read Teams Complete Flight Readiness Review for NASA’s Roman Telescope Blog Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA The Big Bang Black Holes Galaxies Stars

Explore the Universe Dark Energy Contents A Brief History It All Started With Cepheids Discovering an Expanding Universe Expansion is Speeding Up, Supernovae Show What Exactly is Dark Energy? Vacuum Energy Quintessence Space Wrinkles A Flaw in General Relativity The Future Some 13.8 billion years ago, the universe began with a rapid expansion we call the big bang. After this initial expansion, which lasted a fraction of a second, gravity started to slow the universe down. But the cosmos wouldn’t stay this way. Nine billion years after the universe began, its expansion started to speed up, driven by an unknown force that scientists have named dark energy . But what exactly is dark energy? The short answer is: We don't know. But we do know that it exists, it’s making the universe expand at an accelerating rate, and approximately 68.3 to 70% of the universe is dark energy. The history of the universe is outlined in this infographic. NASA A Brief History It All Started With Cepheids Dark energy wasn't discovered until the late 1990s. But its origin in scientific study stretches all the way back to 1912 when American astronomer Henrietta Swan Leavitt made an important discovery using Cepheid variables, a class of stars whose brightness fluctuates with a regularity that depends on the star's brightness. All Cepheid stars with a certain period (a Cepheid’s period is the time it takes to go from bright, to dim, and bright again) have the same absolute magnitude, or luminosity – the amount of light they put out. Leavitt measured these stars and proved that there is a relationship between their regular period of brightness and luminosity. Leavitt’s findings made it possible for astronomers to use a star’s period and luminosity to measure the distances between us and Cepheid stars in far-off galaxies (and our own Milky Way). Around this same time in history, astronomer Vesto Slipher observed spiral galaxies using his telescope’s spectrograph, a device that splits light into the colors that make it up, much like the way a prism splits light into a rainbow. He used the spectrograph, a relatively recent invention at the time, to see the different wavelengths of light coming from the galaxies in different spectral lines. With his observations, Silpher was the first astronomer to observe how quickly the galaxy was moving away from us, called redshift, in distant galaxies. These observations would prove to be critical for many future scientific breakthroughs, including the discovery of dark energy. Redshift is a term used when astronomical objects are moving away from us and the light coming from those objects stretches out. Light behaves like a wave, and red light has the longest wavelength. So, the light coming from objects moving away from us has a longer wavelength, stretching to the “red end” of the electromagnetic. Discovering an Expanding Universe The discovery of galactic redshift, the period-luminosity relation of Cepheid variables, and a newfound ability to gauge a star or galaxy’s distance eventually played a role in astronomers observing that galaxies were getting farther away from us over time, which showed how the universe was expanding. In the years that followed, different scientists around the world started to put the pieces of an expanding universe together. In 1922, Russian scientist and mathematician Alexander Friedmann published a paper detailing multiple possibilities for the history of the universe. The paper, which was based on Albert Einstein’s theory of general relativity published in 1917, included the possibility that the universe is expanding. In 1927, Belgian astronomer Georges Lemaître, who is said to have been unaware of Friedmann’s work, published a paper also factoring in Einstein’s theory of general relativity. And, while Einstein stated in his theory that the universe was static, Lemaître showed how the equations in Einstein’s theory actually support the idea that the universe is not static but, in fact, is actually expanding. Astronomer Edwin Hubble confirmed that the universe was expanding in 1929 using observations made by his associate, astronomer Milton Humason. Humason measured the redshift of spiral galaxies. Hubble and Humason then studied Cepheid stars in those galaxies, using the stars to determine the distance of their galaxies (or nebulae, as they called them). They compared the distances of these galaxies to their redshift and tracked how the farther away an object is, the bigger its redshift and the faster it is moving away from us. The pair found that objects like galaxies are moving away from Earth faster the farther away they are, at upwards of hundreds of thousands of miles per second – an observation now known as Hubble’s Law, or the Hubble-Lemaître law. The universe, they confirmed, is really expanding. This composite image features one of the most complicated and dramatic collisions between galaxy clusters ever seen. Known officially as Abell 2744, this system has been dubbed Pandora’s Cluster because of the wide variety of different structures found. Data from NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory (red) show gas with temperatures of millions of degrees. In blue is a map showing the total mass concentration (mostly dark matter) based on data from NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, the VLT (Very Large Telescope), and the Subaru telescope. Optical data from Hubble and VLT also show the constituent galaxies of the clusters. Astronomers think at least four galaxy clusters coming from a variety of directions are involved with this collision. NASA, ESA, J. Merten (Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, Heidelberg/Astronomical Observatory of Bologna), and D. Coe (STScI) Expansion is Speeding Up, Supernovae Show Scientists previously thought that the universe's expansion would likely be slowed down by gravity over time, an expectation backed by Einstein's theory of general relativity. But in 1998, everything changed when two different teams of astronomers observing far-off supernovae noticed that (at a certain redshift) the stellar explosions were dimmer than expected. These groups were led by astronomers Adam Riess, Saul Perlmutter, and Brian Schmidt. This trio won the 2011 Nobel Prize in Physics for this work. While dim supernovae might not seem like a major find, these astronomers were looking at Type 1a supernovae , which are known to have a certain level of luminosity. So they knew that there must be another factor making these objects appear dimmer. Scientists can determine distance (and speed) using an objects' brightness, and dimmer objects are typically farther away (though surrounding dust and other factors can cause an object to dim). This led the scientists to conclude that these supernovae were just much farther away than they expected by looking at their redshifts. Using the objects’ brightness, the researchers determined the distance of these supernovae. And using the spectrum, they were able to figure out the objects’ redshift and, therefore, how fast they were moving away from us. They found that the supernovae were not as close as expected, meaning they had traveled farther away from us faster than anticipated. These observations led scientists to ultimately conclude that the universe itself must be expanding faster over time. While other possible explanations for these observations have been explored, astronomers studying even more distant supernovae or other cosmic phenomena in more recent years continued to gather evidence and build support for the idea that the universe is expanding faster over time, a phenomenon now called cosmic acceleration. But, as scientists built up a case for cosmic acceleration, they also asked: Why? What could be driving the universe to stretch out faster over time? Enter dark energy. What Exactly is Dark Energy? Right now, dark energy is just the name that astronomers gave to the mysterious "something" that is causing the universe to expand at an accelerated rate. Dark energy has been described by some as having the effect of a negative pressure that is pushing space outward. However, we don't know if dark energy has the effect of any type of force at all. There are many ideas floating around about what dark energy could possibly be. Here are four leading explanations for dark energy. Keep in mind that it's possible it's something else entirely. Vacuum Energy Some scientists think that dark energy is a fundamental, ever-present background energy in space known as vacuum energy, which could be equal to the cosmological constant, a mathematical term in the equations of Einstein's theory of general relativity. Originally, the constant existed to counterbalance gravity, resulting in a static universe. But when Hubble confirmed that the universe was actually expanding, Einstein removed the constant, calling it “my biggest blunder,” according to physicist George Gamow. But when it was later discovered that the universe’s expansion was actually accelerating, some scientists suggested that there might actually be a non-zero value to the previously-discredited cosmological constant. They suggested that this additional force would be necessary to accelerate the expansion of the universe. This theorized that this mystery component could be attributed to something called “vacuum energy,” which is a theoretical background energy permeating all of space. Space is never exactly empty. According to quantum field theory, there are virtual particles, or pairs of particles and antiparticles. It's thought that these virtual particles cancel each other out almost as soon as they crop up in the universe, and that this act of popping in and out of existence could be made possible by “vacuum energy” that fills the cosmos and pushes space outward. While this theory has been a popular topic of discussion, scientists investigating this option have calculated how much vacuum energy there should theoretically be in space. They showed that there should either be so much vacuum energy that, at the very beginning, the universe would have expanded outwards so quickly and with so much force that no stars or galaxies could have formed, or… there should be absolutely none. This means that the amount of vacuum energy in the cosmos must be much smaller than it is in these predictions. However, this discrepancy has yet to be solved and has even earned the moniker "the cosmological constant problem." Quintessence Some scientists think that dark energy could be a type of energy fluid or field that fills space, behaves in an opposite way to normal matter, and can vary in its amount and distribution throughout both time and space. This hypothesized version of dark energy has been nicknamed quintessence after the theoretical fifth element discussed by ancient Greek philosophers. It's even been suggested by some scientists that quintessence could be some combination of dark energy and dark matter, though the two are currently considered completely separate from one another. While the two are both major mysteries to scientists, dark matter is thought to make up about 85% of all matter in the universe. Space Wrinkles Some scientists think that dark energy could be a sort of defect in the fabric of the universe itself; defects like cosmic strings, which are hypothetical one-dimensional "wrinkles" thought to have formed in the early universe. A Flaw in General Relativity Some scientists think that dark energy isn't something physical that we can discover. Rather, they think there could be an issue with general relativity and Einstein's theory of gravity and how it works on the scale of the observable universe. Within this explanation, scientists think that it's possible to modify our understanding of gravity in a way that explains observations of the universe made without the need for dark energy. Einstein actually proposed such an idea in 1919 called unimodular gravity, a modified version of general relativity that scientists today think wouldn't require dark energy to make sense of the universe. The Future Dark energy is one of the great mysteries of the universe. For decades, scientists have theorized about our expanding universe. Now, for the first time ever, we have tools powerful enough to put these theories to the test and really investigate the big question: “what is dark energy?” NASA plays a critical role in the ESA (European Space Agency) mission Euclid (launched in 2023), which will make a 3D map of the universe to see how matter has been pulled apart by dark energy over time. This map will include observations of billions of galaxies found up to 10 billion light-years from Earth. NASA's Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope , set to launch by August 2026, is designed to investigate dark energy, among many other science topics, and will also create a 3D dark matter map. Roman's resolution will be as sharp as NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope's, but with a field of view 100 times larger, allowing it to capture more expansive images of the universe. This will allow scientists to map how matter is structured and spread across the universe and explore how dark energy behaves and has changed over time. Roman will also conduct an additional survey to detect Type Ia supernovae. In addition to NASA’s missions and efforts, the Vera C. Rubin Observatory, supported by a large collaboration that includes the U.S. National Science Foundation, which is currently under construction in Chile, is also poised to support our growing understanding of dark energy. The ground-based observatory is expected to be operational in 2025. The combined efforts of Euclid, Roman, and Rubin will usher in a new “golden age” of cosmology, in which scientists will collect more detailed information than ever about the great mysteries of dark energy. Additionally, NASA's James Webb Space Telescope (launched in 2021), the world’s most powerful and largest space telescope, aims to make contributions to several areas of research, and will contribute to studies of dark energy. NASA's SPHEREx (the Spectro-Photometer for the History of the Universe, Epoch of Reionization, and Ices Explorer) mission, scheduled to launch no later than April 2025, aims to investigate the origins of the universe. Scientists expect that the data collected with SPHEREx, which will survey the entire sky in near-infrared light, including over 450 million galaxies, could help to further our understanding of dark energy. NASA also supports a citizen science project called Dark Energy Explorers , which enables anyone in the world, even those who have no scientific training, to help in the search for dark energy answers. *A brief note* Lastly, to clarify, dark energy is not the same as dark matter. Their main similarity is that we don't yet know what they are! By Chelsea Gohd NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory Latest News 22 Min Read Encore: Welcome to the Dark Side Article 3 Min Read Help Refine Data from Space Telescopes with Artifact InSPECtor 1 Min Read 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Article 22 Min Read Roman Series: Why NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Make Unexpected Discoveries 29 Min Read Roman Series: The Technology Inside NASA’s Newest Space Telescope Do NASA Science with Dark Energy Explorers! There’s an unknown force driving galaxies apart: dark energy! As a Dark Energy Explorer, you’ll help scientists map galaxies in the early universe, revealing how dark energy has influenced our universe over time. Start exploring Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Galaxies Black Holes Stars The Big Bang

Explore This Section NASA Planetary Science NASA’s planetary science program explores the objects in our solar system to better understand its history and the distribution of life within. check it out 50 years on the Surface of Mars See the first image from the surface of Mars and learn more about the legacy of NASA's Viking mission. Discover NASA's Daily Moon Guide This interactive map shows what the Moon will look like on your special day, or any day of the year. Eyes on the Solar System Interact with 3D data visualizations of spacecraft past, present, and future Follow the Progress of NASA's Dragonfly The extraordinary rotorcraft will fly to different sites on Saturn’s moon Titan for scientific investigation. Solar System Treks Explore other worlds with 3D flyovers, data collection using browser-based interactive portals. Get Psyched for Psyche See the unique artwork created by undergrads inspired by NASA's Psyche mission to a metal-rich asteroid and learn how to get involved. Learn More About Artemis II Science Artemis II science operations laid the foundation for safe and efficient human exploration of the Moon and Mars. Watch the First AI-Planned Drive on Mars NASA’s Perseverance Mars rover completed the first drive on another world that was planned by artificial intelligence. See Images of Comet 3I/ATLAS NASA missions worked together to track and study this rare, interstellar comet as it passed through our solar system. Advancing Our Knowledge of Other Worlds For decades, NASA’s planetary science program has advanced scientific understanding of our solar system in extraordinary ways, pushing the limits of spacecraft and robotic engineering design and operation. NASA spacecraft have visited every planet and a variety of small bodies, and current and upcoming missions will bring back samples from exciting destinations, allowing detailed study and analysis back on Earth. Using recommendations from the National Academies' Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey 2023-2032 as our guide, NASA planetary science missions and research inform us about our solar system's origin and evolution, which will enable the expansion of humanity beyond Earth. Just hours before NASA's Juno mission completed its 53rd close flyby of Jupiter on July 31, 2023, the spacecraft sped past the planet's volcanic moon Io and captured this dramatic view of both bodies in the same frame. NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI/MSSS Planetary Science Missions NASA’s robotic explorers gather data to help scientists understand how the planets formed, what triggered different evolutionary paths among planets, what processes have occurred and are active, and how Earth among the planets became habitable. In searching for evidence of life beyond Earth, scientists use these data to map zones of habitability, studying the chemistry of unfamiliar worlds, and unveiling the processes that lead to conditions necessary for life. With this knowledge, NASA is enabling safe and effective human missions to destinations beyond low Earth orbit. Planetary Fleet Chart, per FY26 appropriations. NASA/Tricia Talbert NASA missions continue to explore from the innermost planet, Mercury, to the outer reaches of the solar system, where Pluto orbits among many Kuiper Belt Objects. We have orbited and traversed the surface of Mars, finding evidence of liquid water and ancient habitable environments. Closer to home, the Planetary Science Division uses Earth-orbiting telescopes and ground-based sensors in coordination with other organizations, including the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Air Force. These telescopes and sensors are used to survey space to detect, track, catalog, and characterize near-Earth objects (NEOs), which may pose hazards to Earth or provide destinations and resources for future exploration. Learn More About Planetary Science Missions NASA’s Perseverance rover puts its robotic arm to work around a rocky outcrop called “Skinner Ridge” in Mars’ Jezero Crater. NASA/JPL-Caltech/ASU/MSSS Illustration of NASA's Europa Clipper spacecraft above Jupiter's ocean moon Europa. The spacecraft will use its powerful suite of science instruments to determine if the moon has the ingredients to support life as we know it – that is, "Is Europa habitable?" NASA/JPL-Caltech A SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket with the Psyche spacecraft onboard is launched from Launch Complex 39A, Friday, Oct. 13, 2023, at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida. NASA’s Psyche spacecraft will travel to a metal-rich asteroid by the same name orbiting the Sun between Mars and Jupiter to study it’s composition. The spacecraft also carries the agency’s Deep Space Optical Communications technology demonstration, which will test laser communications beyond the Moon. NASA/Aubrey Gemignani Featured Video Eye on Dragonfly NASA and Johns Hopkins APL give viewers an inside look at NASA's Dragonfly mission as it reaches another exciting milestone on the path to Saturn's moon Titan. Hear directly from Dragonfly scientists and engineers as they discuss the spacecraft's latest progress through integration and testing, explain how Dragonfly will explore Titan, and answer audience questions about the mission. Watch here Planetary Science News Read More Blog 3 Min Read NASA’s DAVINCI Beats Heat in Preparation for Blistering Venus Descent Article 5 Min Read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars Article 2 Min Read NASA’s Integrated Medical Model (IMM) Blog 4 Min Read NASA’s Dragonfly Gets Wired Up While Titan Landing Area Is Named Follow NASA Planetary Social Media See All the Official NASA Social Media Accounts NASA Solar System Exploration Join us as we explore the Sun and the worlds of our solar system. NASA Mars Exploration NASA’s official accounts for all things Mars. Join us as we explore the Red Planet! NASA Space Alerts NASA's official notifications on cosmic activity in near-Earth space including solar events, asteroids, comets, and meteors. NASA Science Where curiosity begins, and discovery never ends. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Solar System Exploration Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Earth’s Moon The Moon makes Earth more livable, sets the rhythm of ocean tides, and keeps a record of our solar system's… Citizen Science in NASA’s Planetary Science Division

Explore This Section NASA Astrophysics Advancing American Leadership in the Cosmos In the Science Mission Directorate (SMD), NASA’s Astrophysics Division leads the nation’s exploration of the universe—driving discoveries that strengthen U.S. leadership, advance innovation, and inspire the next generation of explorers. Exploring the Universe, Advancing Humanity The universe is everything: space, matter, energy, and time. NASA’s Astrophysics Division is dedicated to pushing the boundaries of discovery and ensuring that America remains at the forefront of space science. We study how the universe began and evolved, how it works, and where life might exist beyond Earth. Through world-class space observatories, state-of-the-art technologies, and a spirit of exploration that defines the American character, NASA is unlocking answers to humanity’s greatest questions—while delivering innovations that strengthen the nation’s economy, technology base, and global competitiveness. Working closely with U.S. industry, academic institutions, and international partners, NASA promotes collaboration that advances global understanding and serves mutual interests. By leading with excellence, the United States ensures that astrophysics research continues to benefit people everywhere while upholding our nation’s legacy of discovery. Every discovery from NASA’s Astrophysics Division extends far beyond deep space. The technologies and data developed for our missions fuel innovation across American industry—advancing breakthroughs in imaging, communications, data science, and next-generation materials. These innovations not only reveal the nature of the cosmos but also strengthen our economy and improve life here on Earth. How does the universe work? NASA explores the fundamental forces shaping our universe—from the behavior of black holes and dark energy to the mysteries of gravity and space-time itself. By unlocking these secrets, we advance not only human understanding but also the technologies and methods that keep America at the forefront of discovery. How did we get here? We investigate the origins and evolution of galaxies, stars, and planets to reveal how the universe—and ultimately life itself—came to be. These insights deepen our understanding of cosmic history while driving innovations in observation, data analysis, and engineering that strengthen U.S. scientific leadership. Are we alone? Through missions that discover and study planets around other stars, NASA is searching for worlds that could harbor life. This pursuit unites science, technology, and human curiosity—propelling America’s leadership in the search for life beyond Earth and inspiring generations to look upward and explore. Current Programs A Coordinated Effort to Explore the Universe NASA’s Astrophysics Division carries out its mission through a balanced portfolio of programs, some of which focus on specific science questions or modes of observing, while other cut across multiple domains of science. Together, they ensure that the United States continues to lead in scientific discovery, technology development, and exploration. Each program complements the others across wavelength, observing techniques, and celestial phenomena studied—creating a unified approach to understanding the universe from multiple perspectives. Each program plays a vital role—probing the origins of the universe, studying distant worlds, and supporting a vibrant research community that drives innovation across the Nation. NASA investigates the most extreme environments in the universe—from black holes and neutron stars to dark matter and dark energy. These studies expand our understanding of the fundamental laws of nature while driving new technologies that strengthen America’s leadership in high-energy astrophysics and data science. Physics of the Cosmos Through advanced observatories and imaging technologies, NASA explores how the first stars, galaxies, and heavy elements formed and evolved. This research helps reveal the story of our cosmic beginnings while advancing U.S. capabilities in optics, materials science, and space engineering. Cosmic Origins NASA leads the global search for worlds beyond our solar system, identifying and characterizing planets that could harbor life. By combining cutting-edge instrumentation, artificial intelligence, and strategic partnerships, America continues to pioneer discoveries that redefine our place in the universe. Exoplanet Exploration This program empowers American universities, industry partners, and research institutions to propose and develop innovative small and mid-scale missions. Explorers projects foster rapid innovation, hands-on experience, and cost-effective science—keeping the United States agile and competitive in space exploration Astrophysics Explorers Program From theoretical modeling to data analysis, NASA supports a vibrant community of scientists who turn space-based observations into groundbreaking discoveries. These efforts ensure that U.S. researchers remain at the forefront of interpreting the universe while providing data and discoveries that empower scientists around the world and inspire future generations. Astrophysics Research Learn more about NASA’s Astrophysics Programs Current Missions A Legacy of Discovery, A Future of Innovation NASA’s Astrophysics missions explore the full spectrum of the cosmos—from infrared to visible light to X-rays and beyond—revealing the fundamental nature of the universe and our place within it. These missions represent the United States’ enduring leadership in space science and technology, carrying forward a legacy of discovery that began with the Great Observatories. Today’s active missions include icons such as the Hubble Space Telescope , which continues to redefine our understanding of the universe more than three decades after launch; the Chandra X-ray Observatory , which explores the high-energy universe through the study of black holes, neutron stars, and cosmic explosions; and the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) , which observes the universe in near-and mid-infrared light to reveal the first galaxies and the atmospheres of distant worlds. Complementing these observatories, the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope , Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory , NuSTAR , NICER , and IXPE open new windows on the most energetic processes in the cosmos, from gamma-ray bursts to the remnants of stellar death. Meanwhile, the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) surveys the sky in visible light, using precise measurements to discover planets orbiting nearby stars. The recently launched SPHEREx mission extends NASA’s reach across optical and near-infrared wavelengths, mapping the entire sky to trace the history of galaxies and the building blocks of life throughout the cosmos. Together, these observatories deliver an unparalleled view of the universe—advancing both science and the technologies that power American innovation. NASA’s Astrophysics Division also supports U.S. participation in key international missions, including ESA’s XMM-Newton and Euclid missions, and JAXA’s XRISM mission. These collaborations leverage American technology and scientific expertise to expand humanity’s reach into the universe while strengthening trusted partnerships around the globe. Each mission builds upon decades of U.S. investment and ingenuity—turning bold ideas into discovery and keeping the nation at the forefront of space exploration. The overall strategy for NASA astrophysics is driven by decadal surveys, a task that is requested by Congress and carried out by the National Academy of Sciences. Updated June 2025 The Future of Astrophysics Building on Discovery, Shaping What Comes Next NASA’s Astrophysics Division is entering a bold new era, guided by the discoveries of today, the lessons learned from the past, and the visionary goals of tomorrow. The next generation of missions will expand humanity’s view of the cosmos, harness emerging technologies, and ensure continued U.S. leadership in space science. Launching in fall 2026, the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will open an unprecedented window into the universe. Roman will study dark energy and dark matter, which together make up nearly 95% of the universe, to uncover how these unseen forces shape cosmic evolution and drive the universe’s accelerating expansion. It will also identify thousands of new exoplanets beyond our solar system. By combining deep-field precision with a wide view of the sky and systematic surveys that track how stars and galaxies change with time, Roman will redefine how we explore the cosmos and our place within it. Roman will redefine how we explore the cosmos and our place within it. Following Roman, the Compton Spectrometer and Imager (COSI) , planned for launch in 2027, will study how stars are born and die, tracing the origins of chemical elements that make up planets and life itself. Looking beyond, NASA is developing the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO) , the next major mission in our quest to understand the cosmos. Guided by the 2020 Decadal Survey , Pathways to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 2020s , HWO will build on the legacies of Hubble, Webb, and Roman to search for Earth-like planets and signs of life beyond our solar system. It reflects a modern manifest destiny of the stars, and a shared human journey to explore, to learn, and to push the boundaries of what’s possible. Going forward, the Decadal Surveys will continue to provide the roadmap for the following decade, identifying the highest-priority scientific questions and the technologies and missions needed to answer them. Together, these missions will shape the future of astrophysics—advancing discovery, fostering innovation, and continuing America’s tradition of leadership in exploring the universe. Featured Missions James Webb Space Telescope Webb is celebrating one year of incredible discoveries, from exoplanets to the early Universe. Read More Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Read More Roman Space Telescope Roman is designed to settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and infrared astrophysics. Read More Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020 (Astro2020) The National Academies have completed their work on the 2020 Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics. Please visit the National Academies Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020 web page for additional information about the survey and their published documents on the topic. Learn More about Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020 (Astro2020) Astrophysics Stories Explore All Astrophysics Stories Blog 2 Min Read NASA’s Swift Powers On Third Instrument, Restarts Automated Slewing News Release 4 Min Read NASA Selects Far-Infrared Telescope as First in New Mission Class 2 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Seeks Lensed Supernova, Marks 200,000 Orbits Article 22 Min Read Encore: Welcome to the Dark Side 5 Min Read NASA-JAXA XRISM Mission Sees Pulsar Gathering Companion’s ‘Wind’ Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Science-enabling Technology Exoplanet Exploration Program Habitable Worlds Observatory

NASA’s Swift Powers On Third Instrument, Restarts Automated Slewing NASA’s Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory has resumed use of its third science instrument, the Burst Alert Telescope, after the mission returned to data collection in August. Flight controllers have also allowed the spacecraft to resume automatically repointing its other telescopes to examine new high-energy flashes in the sky. The return to normal operations follows the scaling back of a commercial mission that would have boosted Swift to a higher altitude. Swift team members confirmed that the Burst Alert Telescope was calibrated and detecting gamma rays, the highest energy form of light, on Sept. 18. They had halted use of the instrument, which sees 16% of the sky at a time, in April to reduce power consumption. This allowed Swift’s solar panels to be best positioned to reduce drag and extend the satellite’s time in orbit ahead of the boost effort. Usually, the flight operations team at Penn State in University Park sends a plan to Swift that tells the observatory which cosmic objects and events to observe each day. When the Burst Alert Telescope detects a flare of gamma rays, though, Swift is designed to interrupt the plan and automatically point its Ultraviolet/Optical and X-ray telescopes at the outburst. In December 2025, the science operations team started swapping around 25% of the planned science targets for points in the sky that would minimize drag when Swift was trained on them. By February , the team had switched over to this approach entirely, eliminating Burst Alert Telescope detection slews. The team allowed Swift to return to automated pointing on Sept. 21 after the gamma-ray instrument resumed data collection. The return to science has caused Swift to resume its rapid sinking. It is now located around 200 miles (325 kilometers) above Earth. Below 185 miles (300 kilometers), spacecraft operations become more difficult and science observations will likely cease. The team estimates Swift will reach this threshold sometime in early to mid-October. Monitor the Swift blog for more updates: https://science.nasa.gov/blogs/swift Jeanette Kazmierczak Science writer September 25, 2026 4:01PM Categories

Earth Observatory 5 min read Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo Image of the Day for September 25, 2026 Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the strongest storms the eastern Pacific basin has ever seen. NASA Earth Observatory Sep 25, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Sep 24, 2026 Instruments: Aqua — MODIS Model Topics: Cyclones Ocean Temperature modis mur sst NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison modis mur sst NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison modis mur sst Curtain Toggle 2-Up Image Details After rapidly intensifying, Hurricane Polo spins off Mexico’s Pacific coast on September 23, 2026 (left), over unusually warm waters (right). NASA Earth Observatory images by Michala Garrison, using data from the MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) on NASA's Aqua satellite and the MUR SST (Multiscale Ultrahigh Resolution Sea Surface Temperature) project. In mid-September 2026, Hurricane Polo began as a tropical disturbance off the Pacific coast of Mexico. By September 20, it was organized enough to qualify as a tropical depression, and by the next day it was a tropical storm. From there, Polo launched into a period of rapid intensification that left meteorologists searching for adjectives strong enough to convey what was happening. Some described the storm's rate of intensification and strength as "jaw-dropping," others as "astonishing," and others as "absolute insanity." "Polo went through a period of what can only be described as explosively rapid intensification," said Gary Partyka, an atmospheric scientist with the Global Modeling and Assimilation Office (GMAO) at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, in an email. "This was RAPID, rapid intensification." The storm was in an environment that was "near perfect" for strengthening, Partyka said, characterized by weak wind shear, high moisture, warmer ocean temperatures, and high levels of atmospheric instability. Several observers leaned on extreme rapid intensification —a technical classification meaning the storm's wind speeds increased at least 60 knots (111 kilometers or 69 miles per hour) within a 24-hour period. By September 22, the storm’s maximum sustained wind speed had risen by 90 knots (167 kilometers per hour or 104 miles per hour) within 24 hours, hitting category 5 strength. In its normally staid forecast discussions, the National Hurricane Center called the intensification "truly remarkable." When NOAA's Hurricane Hunter aircraft flew over the storm on September 22, researchers estimated winds of nearly 285 kilometers (180 miles) per hour. That would make it the third-strongest storm on record in the eastern Pacific by maximum sustained winds and the fastest on record to go from a tropical depression to a category 5 storm, according to some analysts . On the afternoon of September 23, when the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer ( MODIS ) on NASA's Aqua satellite captured this image (left), Polo was churning off the coast of Guerrero, southwest of Acapulco. With maximum sustained winds of 230 kilometers (145 miles) per hour, the storm was category 4 strength when the image was acquired, having undergone an eyewall replacement cycle that weakened it slightly. “The satellite imagery of Polo is very impressive, with the storm’s large, clear eye and extensive outflow pattern,” said Kristen Corbosiero, an atmospheric scientist at the State University of New York at Albany, who is working on a NASA project that uses satellite data to study tropical cyclone ventilation. “Weak winds above the system and good outflow at the top of the system also contributed to Polo's rapid intensification.” As Polo developed, it moved over areas where sea surface temperatures were as high as 32 degrees Celsius (90 degrees Fahrenheit)—2 to 3 degrees warmer than usual for September 23. Surface waters across much of the region were above 27.8°C (82°F), the temperature generally required to sustain and intensify hurricanes. The map above (right) is based on data from the Multiscale Ultrahigh Resolution Sea Surface Temperature (MUR SST) project at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which blends satellite measurements from NASA, NOAA, and international missions with observations from ships and buoys. Rather than absolute temperatures, the map shows anomalies—how much warmer or cooler the ocean surface was on September 23, 2026, than the project’s 2003-2014 average for that date. While the map above conveys temperatures at the water surface, the presence of warm water deeper in the column has likely contributed to the storm's staying power, Corbosiero added. Sometimes hurricanes churn up cooler water from deep in the column that can slow a storm's intensification, but in this case the cool water wake behind the storm appears minimal, and measurements and models show high ocean heat content at considerable depths. Both Partyka and Corbosiero cautioned against attributing Polo's rapid intensification directly to El Niño ’s unusually warm surface temperatures in the central and eastern Pacific Ocean. Several hurricanes in this region have undergone rapid intensification in the past during La Niña and neutral conditions, Corbosiero noted, including Hurricane Otis in 2023 and Patricia in 2015 , both category 5 storms. However, the overall amount of tropical cyclone activity in the eastern Pacific does typically increase during El Niño due to changes in large-scale ocean and atmospheric circulation patterns, and that's what has happened so far in 2026. As of September 24, the accumulated cyclone energy in the region was nearly twice the norm , according to data from Colorado State University . People tracking sea surface temperature anomalies or other aspects of the storm can do so using NASA's Worldview browser , a near real-time data viewer from the Short-term Prediction Research and Transition (SPoRT) project, and the FLUID tool from GMAO. Forecasters expect Polo to stay over the Pacific until next week, when it may curve toward the northeast and approach Baja California. NASA Earth Observatory images by Michala Garrison, using sea surface temperature data from the Multiscale Ultrahigh Resolution (MUR) project, MODIS data from NASA EOSDIS LANCE and GIBS/Worldview , and storm track data from NOAA's National Hurricane Center . Story by Adam Voiland. Downloads September 23, 2026: MODIS Natural Color JPEG (2.55 MB) September 23, 2026: MUR Sea Surface Temperatures JPEG (1.20 MB) References & Resources Colorado State University (2026, September 23) Real-Time Northeast Pacific Ocean Statistics by Storm for 2026 . Accessed September 24, 2026. Cooperative Institute for Research in the Atmosphere (2026) Polo . Accessed September 24, 2026. Eye on the Tropics (2026, September 23) Polo Puts on a Show Over the Eastern Pacific . Accessed September 24, 2026. Forbes (2026, September 22) Explosive Hurricane Polo Could Remain Category 5 For Days . Accessed September 24, 2026. Meir, J., via X (2026, September 24) Hurricane Polo is looking massive from the @Space_Station cupola . Accessed September 24, 2026. NASA Earthdata Tropical Cyclones . Accessed September 24, 2026. National Hurricane Center (2026) Hurricane POLO Advisory Archive . Accessed September 24, 2026. Stern, D., et al. (2026) Distinguishing Tropical Cyclone Extreme Rapid Intensification from Ordinary Rapid Intensification . Monthly Weather Review , 154(10), 2133-2149. The Washington Post (2026, September 22) Hurricane Polo intensified to a Category 5 in less than a day . Accessed September 24, 2026. Yale Climate Connections (2026, September 23) Powerful Hurricane Polo threatens Mexico with torrential rain as Pacific tropics erupt . Accessed September 24, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Lala Batters Hawaii 3 min read The powerful storm delivered extreme rainfall and damaging winds to the state, passing the Island of Hawaiʻi as a category… Article Tropical Storm Arthur 2 min read The first named storm of the 2026 Atlantic hurricane season brought intense rainfall and the threat of flash flooding to… Article A Trio of Tropical Cyclones in the Pacific 4 min read The Pacific was buzzing with storms while the Atlantic was notably quiet. Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 2 min read Cloudy Cloak Over the Northwest Image of the Day for September 24, 2026 A low-lying cloud layer brought autumn ambience to western Washington and Oregon, while mountainous areas near the coast remained above the pall. NASA Earth Observatory Sep 24, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Sep 23, 2026 Sep 25, 2026 Instruments: Terra — MODIS Topics: Clouds September 19, 2026 NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison Cool, marine air rolling off the Pacific Ocean led to a picturesque layer of morning clouds over western Washington and Oregon in mid-September 2026. Low-lying stratus clouds and fog extended as far inland as the western foothills of the Cascade Range. Near the coast, taller portions of the Olympic Mountains in Washington and the Oregon Coast Range appeared island-like, protruding above the cloud layer. The MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) on NASA’s Terra satellite shows the extent of the Pacific Northwest’s cloudy cloak on September 19, 2026, at about 10:45 a.m. Pacific Time (17:45 Universal Time). Abundant clouds also appear offshore over the Pacific, while smoke from wildland fires fills valleys in the North Cascades. For several nights in a row, marine air flowed onshore, according to the National Weather Service , bringing with it low-level clouds known as marine stratus . These clouds form when moist air near the surface, trapped beneath a warmer air layer in a temperature inversion , cools enough for its water vapor to condense. The surge of cool, moist conditions was particularly strong early on September 19, producing cloudy conditions all the way up to the Cascade foothills. Some areas witnessed foggy conditions , where clouds extended down to the ground. That same day, when NASA's Aqua satellite passed over the area at about 4:15 p.m. Pacific Time (23:15 Universal Time), skies had cleared over much of the area. However, some marine clouds still clung to the Oregon coast, where temperatures stayed cooler than inland locations. NASA Earth Observatory image by Michala Garrison, using MODIS data from NASA EOSDIS LANCE and GIBS/Worldview . Story by Lindsey Doermann. Downloads September 19, 2026 JPEG (3.26 MB) References & Resources Dye, A. W., et al. (2020). Spatial patterns and trends of summertime low cloudiness for the Pacific Northwest, 1996–2017 . Geophysical Research Letters , 47, e2020GL088121. EUMeTrain, Fog and Stratus . Accessed September 23, 2026. NASA Earth Observatory (2016, December 20) A Celebration of Clouds From Space, Earth Has an Elegant Atmosphere . Accessed September 23, 2026. National Weather Service, What are Marine Layer Clouds and How Do they Form? Accessed September 23, 2026. National Weather Service Portland, OR (2026, September 23) Area Forecast Discussion . Accessed September 23, 2026. National Weather Service Seattle WA (2026, September 23) Area Forecast Discussion . Accessed September 23, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. El Niño Is Underway 4 min read Satellite observations of sea surface height indicated that the 2026 event continued to strengthen in early June. Article El Niño Alters Marine Life in the Pacific 5 min read Satellite measurements of chlorophyll at the sea surface signal shifts in the ocean’s nutrient supplies in mid-2026. Article Olympic Mountain Glory 4 min read Snow-capped mountains carved by deep river valleys preside over northwestern Washington state. Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

3 Min Read Embracing the Equinox Illustration showing how Earth's tilt leads to the Northern and Southern Hemispheres receiving changing amounts of sunlight over the course of the year. At the equinoxes, neither hemisphere is more tilted toward the Sun, so both hemispheres receive the same amount of sunlight. Credits: NASA/JPL-Caltech Kat Troche Sep 21, 2026 Article Depending on your locale, equinoxes can be seen as harbingers of longer nights and gloomy weather, or promising beacons of nicer temperatures and more sunlight. Observing and predicting equinoxes is one of the earliest skills in humanity’s astronomical toolkit. Many ancient observatories around the world observed equinoxes along with the more pronounced solstices. These days, you don’t need your own observatory to know when an equinox occurs, since you’ll see it marked on your calendar twice a year! The word “equinox” originates from Latin, and translates to equal (equi-) night (-nox). But what exactly is an equinox? An equinox occurs twice every year, in March and September. In 2026, the equinoxes will occur on March 20, at exactly 14:46 UTC (or 7:46 AM EDT), and again on September 23, at 00:05 UTC (or September 22, 2026, at 5:05 PM PDT). The equinox marks the exact moment when the center of the Sun crosses the plane of our planet’s equator. The day of an equinox, observers at the equator will see the Sun directly overhead at noon. After the March equinox, observers anywhere on Earth will see the Sun’s path in the sky continue its movement further north every day until the June solstice, after which it begins traveling south. The Sun crosses the equatorial plane again during the September equinox, and continues traveling south until the December solstice, when it heads back north once again. This movement is why some refer to the March equinox as the northward equinox and the September equinox as the southward equinox . A full disk view of the earth from GOES 16, GOES East on the vernal Equinox. NOAA/NASA Our Sun shines equally on both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres during equinoxes, which is why they are the only times of the year when the Earth’s North and South Poles are simultaneously lit by sunlight. Notably, the length of day and night on the equinox isn’t precisely equal; the date for that split depends on your latitude, and may occur a few days earlier or later than the equinox itself. The complicating factors? Our Sun and atmosphere! The Sun itself is a sphere and not a point light source, so its edge is refracted by our atmosphere as it rises and sets, which adds several minutes of light to every day. The Sun doesn’t neatly wink on and off at sunrise and sunset like a light bulb, and so there isn’t a perfect split of day and night on the equinox - but it’s very close. Equinoxes are associated with the changing seasons. In March, Northern Hemisphere observers welcome the longer, warmer days heralded by their vernal , or spring, equinox, but Southern Hemisphere observers note the shorter days – and longer, cooler nights - signaled by their autumnal , or fall, equinox. Come September, the reverse is true. Originally posted by Dave Prosper: February 2022 Last Updated by Kat Troche: March 2026

APOD Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere You currently sit at the black hole's photon sphere, where light can travel endlessly in a circle due to the star's great gravitational pull. The apparent position of the photon sphere is always easy to spot - it is the apparent dividing line between black hole and sky. As you circle the black hole the sky appears to move in strange ways. Here an Einstein ring for background stars can be seen as an invisible line above the photon sphere horizon. Stars approaching the exact other side of the black hole from you appear to approach this line, are greatly magnified, and move with high angular speeds. As one background star image is greatly magnified, so is another 180 degrees around the black hole - but with your current point of view you can see only one at a time. Your spaceship's motion can cause a star image below this Einstein ring to become very bright and shoot out of view - while a moment later the other bright image of this same star zooms into view above the Einstein ring and fades. You are not at the event horizon, which is still below you. Were you to travel to the event horizon the sky would appear to scrunch up into a little dot opposite the black hole. My computer programs cannot yet track you that far with much accuracy, and so I cannot take you there today. Nobody really knows what it looks like inside a black hole, on the other side of the event horizon. Next: Take a trip to a neutron star. Replay the movie segment: Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere. Peruse the American Journal of Physics Article on this subject. Back to Virtual Trips to Black Holes and Neutron Stars Page Today's Astronomy Picture of the Day

APOD Circling the Black Hole The first frame shows a background sky highly distorted by the black hole in the center. The gravity of the black hole is so great that it actually deflects the background starlight. Large light bending effects cause the background sky to appear to move in unusual ways as you circle the black hole. Light paths are so curved that light can reach you from anywhere on the sky - even from behind the black hole - no part of the sky is eclipsed. Distant starlight has fallen to you and therefore appears 'blueshifted.' The large light bending effects cause stars on the opposite side of the black hole to become greatly magnified. Stars usually too dim to see become visible. If you watch closely you can identify an invisible circular ring around the black hole on either side of which stars counter-rotate. This is an Einstein ring , and stars do not cross through it. Stars approaching the exact opposite side of the black hole from you are seen to have two bright images, one appearing just outside this Einstein ring, and the other 180 degrees around the face of the black hole and just inside this Einstein ring. Stars in this location appear to move with the highest angular speed. Next: Dropping down to the photon sphere. Play the movie segment: Circling the black hole. Play the next movie segment: Approaching the photon sphere. Go to the hypertext describing the next movie segment: Approaching the photon sphere. Peruse the American Journal of Physics Article on this subject. Back to Virtual Trips to Black Holes and Neutron Stars Page Today's Astronomy Picture of the Day

APOD Approaching the Black Hole The first frame depicts the observer in empty space looking toward the constellation Orion. The three stars in Orion's belt are visible to the right of the center of the screen. Sirius can be seen as the brightest star in the sky below and to left of Orion's belt, and Betelgeuse is the reddish star just above Orion's belt. As the movie progresses the observer moves toward the black hole. An odd diffuse glow of light appears in the center of the screen. Soon a black spot appears - the black hole itself. The black hole is almost completely dark - light cannot escape from it. Black holes do release a slight bit of light as they evaporate, as postulated by Hawking. As the observer moves toward the black hole, the original star images appear pushed away from the black hole This is because the starlight that originally reached you is now strongly attracted toward the black hole and hence deflected away from you. Only starlight passing further from the black hole might now be attracted toward the black hole so that it is deflected to your eye. Note also "new" dimmer images of stars become visible near the black hole. Here the strong gravity of the black hole has pulled another image of stars around the far side toward your eye. Soon there are two discernable images of everything in the sky. A secondary images of star can be identified with their corresponding primary image by noting that they can be connected by drawing a straight line on the sky through the center of the black hole and finding stars of like color. As the computer generated animation continues, the observer stops just 42 kilometers from the black hole. The universe looks like a very strange place from here. Next: Orbiting the black hole. Play the movie segment: Approaching the black hole. Play the next movie segment: Circling the black hole at some distance. Go to the hypertext describing the next movie segment: Circling the black hole at some distance. Peruse the American Journal of Physics Article on this subject. Back to Virtual Trips to Black Holes and Neutron Stars Page Today's Astronomy Picture of the Day

Explore This Section Habitable Worlds Observatory Precursor Science Investigations (ROSES D.8) We are seeking virtual panelists and external reviewers for Habitable Worlds Observatory Precursor Science Investigations (ROSES D.8). Signing up does not commit you to serve, nor is NASA obligated to ask/invite you. If you are a funded team member on proposal to a given panel, then you will not be able to serve on that review panel. You may be able to serve on another panel or provide on-line reviews. Here are the rules: Use the comments box below to tell us about anything that might be conflict of interest. Other than that just click the buttons.

Explore the Universe Fun Exploring the Universe Explore our universe with these inspiring, informative, and fun activities and related resources. From coloring pages to quirky videos, you’ll enjoy learning about our fascinating cosmos. Universe Coloring Pages We have a whole universe to color! If you've ever dreamed of coloring supernova remnants and merging neutron stars, we have pages for you. Or if you just want to learn a little about what makes a gamma-ray burst, we have that, too. Check out the collections at the link below to find something that will unleash your creativity. Find our coloring page collection here Our Traveler can’t wait to go visit a black hole! However, before they go, we have a few safety tips for their journey. These coloring pages will give you some basics about black holes, too. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Preschool Activities with NASA’s Traveler Blast off into some learning fun! Explore big ideas with little learners using these easy, printable activities designed to spark curiosity, build early skills, and introduce preschoolers to the wonders of the cosmos through play-based learning. From counting stars to matching black holes, each activity blends fun with foundational skills. Just print and play! Explore the activities here Pre-handwriting tracers are an activity that help youngsters get ready for writing by tracing fun lines and curves. A young boy uses a marker to trace the tumbling path of asteroids on one of these activity sheets. NASA/Ashley Balzer NASA’s Traveler Learns About the Universe Our Traveler can’t wait to explore the universe! It’s hard not to be caught up in their boundless enthusiasm for all the wondrous sights the cosmos has to offer. You can check out their adventures on NASA+ . Then explore the link below for wallpapers, postcards, and more. Join the Traveler on a trip here Have you ever thought about visiting a black hole? We sure hope not. However, if you're absolutely convinced that a black hole is your ideal vacation spot, make sure to get a primer on black hole safety first. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center JPL Education Website The JPL Education website offers an extensive catalog of standards-aligned STEM lessons , DIY student projects , and other educational resources. Designed for K-12 classroom teachers, informal educators, parents, and students, the resources cover a wide range of STEM concepts in the context of the latest missions and science at NASA and JPL — the leading center for robotic exploration of the solar system. JPL Education also offers educator workshops, webinars, and other educational events and programs, which can be found on its events calendar . Check out their STEM resources In this strategy card game, students work individually or collaboratively to build a spacecraft capable of exploring our solar system. Students must use problem-solving skills as well as their knowledge of and research into STEM and space exploration concepts to win the game. The object is to fully “explore” their destination by accumulating exploration points. NASA/JPL-Caltech Universe of Learning NASA’s Universe of Learning aims to engage learners of all ages and backgrounds in exploring the universe for themselves. Leveraging the NASA Astrophysics mission data and experts, they create a range of videos, activities, facilitator guides, data experiences, and professional development resources. Their expertise and direct connections allow them to create innovative projects and design novel approaches to engage learners in the secrets of the cosmos. Check out NASA's Universe of Learning The NASA’s Universe of Learning team connects the public to the data, discoveries, and experts that span NASA’s Astrophysics missions. Our team is made up of scientists, engineers, and educators who have direct connections to these missions. We also rely on a nationwide network of informal educators, scientists, and engineers who not only share our resources, but also help us develop them. NASA Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA For Kids and Students Learn Math with NASA Science For Fun & Learning Citizen Science Projects Through the projects below, sometimes called "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of…

Roman Educational Activity Center Learning can be fun with Roman. Check out the following activities: Fields of View: Flip and Stamping In this activity, participants investigate how a telescope's field of view (FOV) affects its efficiency and the science it can perform. Get Instructions Roman Field of View Activity: Tube "Telescopes" In this activity, participants compare and contrast the fields of view of the Hubble Space Telescope and the Roman Space Telescope, using the apparent size of the Moon in the sky for comparison. Get Instructions Bake a Cosmic Cake To celebrate what would have been the 100th birthday of Dr. Nancy Grace Roman — NASA’s first chief astronomer and the namesake for the agency’s nearly complete Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope — we’re baking a cosmic birthday cake! See the Recipe Space Crafts with NASA In honor of the completion of our Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope’s spacecraft — the vehicle that will maneuver the observatory to its place in space and enable it to function once there — we’re bringing you some space crafts you can complete at home! View Collection Roman Knit Pattern Find the color work pattern for the Roman emblem, the Wide Field Instrument focal plane, which can be incorporated into a myriad of different knitting projects such as scarves, hats, cowls, pot holders, etc.. Get the Pattern Roman 3D Paper Model Build your own 3D model of the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope! Try your hand as an engineer, and build a paper model of the Roman Space Telescope. Grab your scissors and glue and (safely) start building. Get Instructions Roman Coloring Pages Our Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope presents coloring pages. Unleash your creativity to bring these celestial scenes to life. Download Pages Roman Valentines Infrared is red, Ultraviolet’s not quite blue, The Nancy Grace Roman Space telescope has some Valentine's Day Cards for you! Be My Valentine Pumpkin Stencil Celebrate Halloween with this Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope footprint pumpkin stencil. Download the Stencil 3D Printed Model The current design of the mission makes use of an existing 2.4-meter telescope, which is the same size as the Hubble Space Telescope. Get Instructions PLAY THE GAME Roman Space Observer Video Game This game is intended to entertain players across a wide variety of interests and skillsets, all while spreading the word of the Nancy Grace Roman Telescope and the fantastic science it will uncover. Can you beat the high scores? Key Poster Key Poster Key Poster POSTER ACTIVITY Roman Coronagraph Instrument NASA's Roman Coronagraph Instrument will greatly advance our ability to directly image exoplanets, or planets and disks around other stars. Click on IMAGE DETAILS below to view the artwork key. Curtain Toggle 2-Up Image Details 1. The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 2. Exoplanet Count : Total number of exoplanets discovered at the time of poster release. This number is increasing all of the time. 3. Nancy Grace Roman's birth year : Nancy Grace Roman was born on May 16, 1925. 4. Color Filters : Filters block different wavelengths, or colors, of light. 5. Exoplanet Camera 6. Deformable Mirrors : Adjusts the wavefront of incoming light by changing the shape of a mirror with thousands of tiny pistons. 7. Focal Plane Mask : This is a mask that helps to block starlight and reveal exoplanets. 8. Lyot Stop Mask : This is a mask that helps to block starlight and reveal exoplanets. 9. Fast Steering Mirror : This element corrects for telescope pointing jitter. 10. Additional Coronagraph Masks : These masks block most of the glare from stars to reveal faint orbiting planets and dusty debris disks. Downloads Poster Front PNG (35 MB) Poster Key PNG (12 MB) Coronagraph Pinball Poster PDF (45 MB) Key Poster Key Poster Key Poster POSTER ACTIVITY Wide-Field Instrument (WFI) The Wide-Field Instrument (WFI), the primary instrument aboard NASA's Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, is a 300-megapixel visible and infrared camera that will allow scientists to perform revolutionary astrophysics surveys. Click on IMAGE DETAILS below to view the artwork key. Curtain Toggle 2-Up Image Details 1. The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 2. Light Path : The light entering the telescope will take this path, bouncing off of multiple focusing mirrors and passing through filters or dispersers in the element wheel to reach the detectors. 3. Important Years : 1990: NASA's Hubble Space Telescope launched. 1960: Nancy Grace Roman became NASA's Chief Astronomer. 4. Field of View : Roman's field of view is about 100 times larger than that of the infrared camera onboard the Hubble Space Telescope. WFI's large field of view is achieved using an array of 18 detectors which are represented by the squares in this graphic 5. Detectors : This dial has one tick mark for each of WFI’s 18 detectors. 6. Modes : WFI has imaging and spectroscopy modes. 7. Wavelengths : WFI will observe in both visible and infrared light and can select which wavelengths reach the detectors using filters in the element wheel. 8. "Dark Energy" Drink + "Dark Matter" Candy : Roman will enable new research into the mysteries of dark energy and dark matter. 9. Science Goals : The names of these games capture WFI’s role as a survey instrument and the types of surveys it will perform. 10. Joystick : This joystick features design elements found on the WFI’s element wheel assembly, a large, rotating metal disk with optics that filter or disperse light. Downloads Poster Front PNG (35 MB) Poster Key PNG (12 MB) WFI Gaming Poster PDF (45 MB) NASA Learning Resources Check out these NASA websites for more educational activities. SpaceMath @ NASA This resource offers over 1000 math problems that reveal the many ways math and science work together to help us understand the universe. NASA's Guide To Black Hole Safety Have you ever thought about visiting a black hole? We sure hope not. However, if you're absolutely convinced that a black hole is your ideal vacation spot, watch this video before you blast off to learn about them and (more importantly) how to stay safe. NASA Kids Club NASA provides a safe place for children to play as they learn about NASA and its missions. Find games of various skill levels for children pre-K through grade 4. These games support national education standards in STEM -- science, technology, engineering and mathematics. NASA's 'Curious Universe' podcast Our universe is a wild and wonderful place. Join NASA astronauts, scientists and engineers on a new adventure each week — all you need is your curiosity. Explore faraway galaxies and dive into our astronaut training pool. First-time space explorers welcome. Space Place NASA’s award-winning Space Place website engages upper-elementary-aged children in space and Earth science through interactive games, hands-on activities, fun articles and short videos. Keep Exploring Posters and Infographics Scientific Visualizations Technical Graphs and Data Gallery Brochures and Fact Sheets

Roman Dark Energy Roman will help illuminate the dark energy puzzle by using multiple methods to explore how the universe has evolved throughout cosmic history. The universe is ballooning outward as space itself stretches, perhaps under the force of a mysterious cosmic pressure known as dark energy. Galaxies like our own are hurtling away from each other at an ever-increasing clip, swept apart by an unseen power. All the stars in our galaxy, the particles in our planet, and even the atoms in our bodies would immediately fly apart if they weren't held together by stronger forces . Though weak on small scales, dark energy dominates across vast stretches of the cosmos. It makes up about 68% of the universe's total contents, but so far we don't know much more about it. In some ways, the mystery has gotten even more confusing as we've learned more — the latest and most thorough observations seem to show that the strange pressure is shifting over time, holding the fate of the universe in the balance. NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will usher in a new era of dark energy exploration, potentially solving the mystery of its true nature. Until the 20th century, most scientists believed the universe was static, remaining essentially unchanged throughout eternity. Gradually, astronomers discovered that not only is our universe expanding — its expansion is inexplicably speeding up, possibly due to a mysterious forced dubbed dark energy. The next wave of dark energy missions, including NASA's Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, will search for clues by mapping galaxies and watching how they move, grow, and bend light to track expansion more precisely over longer stretches of cosmic time. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Illuminating Dark Energy To figure out whether dark energy truly exists (and, if so, what it actually is), scientists are studying how it behaves. But it seems the more we learn about the mystery, the more perplexing it becomes. Recent results hint that dark energy may be changing over time in ways we don't yet understand. The next wave of dark energy missions will search for clues by mapping galaxies and watching how they move, grow, and bend light to track expansion more precisely over longer stretches of cosmic time. Together, Roman, Rubin, and Euclid will usher in a new era of dark energy discovery When Roman opens its eyes to the cosmos, its large field of view and crisp infrared vision will help scientists collect a treasure trove of valuable data. The mission will use several different measurement techniques to test our model of the universe between early and modern periods, with each method cross-checking the others. The recent discovery that dark energy may be evolving could mean that dark energy began influencing the universe’s expansion earlier than scientists thought. Roman will explore cosmic expansion during earlier epochs, providing unique information that remains shrouded from other telescopes. This could confirm whether dark energy is really changing over time and offer clues to explain such unexpected behavior. Baryon Acoustic Oscillations Type Ia Supernovae Weak Lensing Baryon Acoustic Oscillations Roman will detect vestiges of sound waves, called baryon acoustic oscillations (BAOs), that once rippled through the primordial cosmic sea. The mission’s observations could extend these measurements into an unprobed epoch, which will help astronomers trace the evolution of the universe. Read More This animation shows vast rings of galaxies – an imprint of BAOs – stretching with the expansion of the universe. Credit: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Type Ia Supernovae Roman will see thousands of exploding stars called supernovae across vast stretches of time and space. Using these observations, astronomers aim to shine a light on several cosmic mysteries — primarily dark energy. Read More Animation of a type Ia supernova. Credit: NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center/CI Labs Weak Lensing Roman will study how the universe’s web of matter has evolved by measuring how gravity subtly bends the path of light across vast distances. This warping reveals clues about the distribution of dark matter and the universe’s accelerated expansion. Read More This animation shows the type of science that astronomers will be able to do with future Roman observations. The gravity of intervening galaxy clusters and dark matter can lens the light from farther objects, warping their appearance. By studying the distorted light, astronomers can study elusive dark matter, which can only measured indirectly through its gravitational effects on visible matter. As a bonus, this lensing also makes it easier to see the most distant galaxies whose light they magnify. Credit: Caltech-IPAC/R. Hurt Roman's sweeping surveys will reveal tens of thousands of exploding stars and hundreds of millions of distant galaxies, tracing the expansion of the universe across nearly all of cosmic history. It will help fill in the gaps between the early universe and relatively modern times, potentially identifying when dark energy began weakening. So far, the nature of dark energy has remained elusive. While recent findings seem to suggest its power is changing over time, there's enough uncertainty in the data that it could still go either way. Maybe our standard model of cosmology is in for an update, or maybe it's fine as-is after all. Combining Roman's data with Rubin's and Euclid's should present a clearer picture, finally revealing which is correct and homing in on cosmic eras where the universe was in flux. As these missions probe the history of the expansion and growth of the universe and tackle some of the biggest mysteries ever known, they will bring us closer to understanding the cosmos and our place within it. Featured Story What is Dark Energy? Inside our accelerating, expanding Universe Some 13.8 billion years ago, the universe began with a rapid expansion we call the big bang. After this initial… Read the Story Related Stories Article 7 Min Read NASA’s Roman Mission to Probe Cosmic Secrets Using Exploding Stars Article 8 Min Read New ‘Eyewear’ to Deepen the View of NASA’s Roman Space Telescope 6 Min Read NASA’s Roman Space Telescope to Uncover Echoes of the Universe’s Creation Article 7 Min Read NASA’s Roman and ESA’s Euclid Will Team Up To Investigate Dark Energy Article 6 Min Read Why NASA’s Roman Mission Will Study Milky Way’s Flickering Lights Article

Galaxy Gallery: Galactic Gems Glisten in New Gallery From NASA’s Chandra This gallery displays a collection of 16 galactic images from Chandra and other telescopes. Astronomers put galaxies into three main categories: spirals like our own Milky Way, ellipticals that are older and likely the results of mergers, and irregulars that can encompass a wide range of galactic phenomena. All types are represented in this collection. Each galactic image contains X-ray data from Chandra combined with data from telescopes such as NASA’s Webb, Hubble, IXPE, Swift, and NuSTAR, and others both in space and on the ground. This gallery displays a collection of 16 galactic images from Chandra and other telescopes. Astronomers put galaxies into three main... This gallery displays a collection of 16 galactic images from Chandra and other telescopes. Astronomers put galaxies into three main... A barred spiral galaxy featuring a prominent central bar or bridge of stars that channels gas toward its core. Chandra... A chaotic, dust-shrouded system of merging galaxies forming stars at a furious rate. Chandra X-ray data (magenta) pinpoint powerful black... A nearby, face-on spiral galaxy whose clear spiral arms offer an unhindered view of its stellar engine. X-ray data from... A spiral galaxy famous for having two extra, "anomalous" spiral arms composed of hot gas. Chandra's X-rays (royal blue) show... A compact dwarf irregular galaxy undergoing a violent, compact burst of star formation. Chandra and XMM-Newton observations (blue and purple)... A large spiral galaxy that is being stripped of its gas as it plunges at high speed through hot gas... A giant elliptical galaxy undergoing a dusty merger, featuring a powerful jet of particles blasting tens of thousands of light-years... Famous for its broad central bulge and dark outer dust ring, this galaxy sits at a nearly edge-on tilt to... This ring galaxy system formed when a smaller companion galaxy punched straight through its center like a bullseye, creating a... A "one-armed" barred spiral galaxy surrounded by a prominent star-forming ring. Chandra's X-ray data (magenta) pinpoints several bright X-ray sources,... A barred spiral galaxy packed with regions where stars are actively forming. Chandra X-ray data (magenta) highlights stellar nurseries and... A rare "polar ring" galaxy where a tilted outer ring of stars and dust rotates over the galaxy's poles, an... An irregular galaxy undergoing intense star formation because of a gravitational interaction with a neighboring galaxy hundreds of millions of... A pair of colliding, gas-rich spiral galaxies merging into a single massive system. Chandra’s X-ray data (pink) isolates point sources... A face-on spiral galaxy whose orientation gives us an unobstructed view of its disk. X-ray emissions from Chandra (magenta) detail... A spiral galaxy viewed from its side, featuring a giant halo of hot gas blowing out of its stellar disk....

5 min read NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars Francis Reddy Aug 25, 2026 Article Pandora, NASA’s newest exoplanet mission and the first satellite to launch through the agency's Astrophysics Pioneers program, is now making unique observations of worlds beyond our solar system and the stars they orbit. The mission will determine the atmospheric make-up of at least 20 exoplanets, including the presence of hazes, clouds, and water. “Pandora’s data will help close a major gap in our knowledge about planets and their host stars because, right now, we can’t be entirely sure how the star’s light affects measurements of what makes up exoplanet atmospheres,” said Elisa Quintana, Pandora’s principal investigator at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. “We designed the Pandora spacecraft and its in-depth observing program to better understand this vexing issue.” Artist’s concept of NASA’s Pandora mission, which will help scientists untangle the signals from exoplanets' atmospheres and their stars. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Conceptual Image Lab Download high-resolution video and images from NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio The results of the mission will lay a firm foundation for interpreting measurements by NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope, as well as future observatories focused on finding habitable worlds. In fact, Pandora’s near-infrared detector is a spare originally developed for Webb. "The spacecraft is healthy and all of the instruments are performing as well as we could have hoped,” said Jordan Karburn, Pandora’s deputy project manager at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California. “Our team’s hard work throughout the commissioning process has paid off, and we can now confidently start science." This artist’s concept summarizes NASA’s Pandora mission and its science goals. Pandora will repeatedly observe multiple planets and their host stars in both visible and near-infrared light. These measurements will enable astronomers to separate chemical fingerprints detected in a planet’s atmosphere from potentially misleading signals originating from its host star. NASA/Sophia Roberts Download high-resolution video and images from NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio Launched into low Earth orbit on Jan. 11, Pandora is an ambitious small satellite (SmallSat) funded by NASA’s Astrophysics Pioneers program. Pioneers are designed to explore compelling questions about the universe with fast-paced, low-cost missions that require a higher-than-usual tolerance for failure. Three factors make Pandora unique. It carries a novel all-aluminum telescope about 18 inches (45 centimeters) in diameter, it will study planets and their host stars simultaneously in both visible and infrared light, and it will observe targets for a much longer time than flagship observatories like Webb are able to. Telescopes can sample a planet’s atmosphere in systems where the planet passes in front of its star as seen from our perspective. During this event, called a transit, some starlight skims the planet’s atmosphere before making its way to us. As this light interacts with atmospheric molecules, their chemical fingerprints become embedded in it. For each molecule, astronomers see brightness dips at characteristic wavelengths. But our instruments also see light from the whole star, not just what grazes the planet. Stellar surfaces aren’t uniform. They sport hotter, brighter areas called faculae and cooler, darker regions similar to sunspots. Both can grow, shrink, and change position as the star rotates. “Water is one of the most important molecules we can measure to understand the composition and physical conditions of an exoplanet atmosphere,” said Benjamin Rackham, a team member at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge. “But features on the star can distort the water signal we’re searching for. Pandora is designed to disentangle the signals from the planet and the star, helping us to understand the planets more accurately and laying the groundwork for the eventual study of planets that could harbor life.” Watch to learn more about NASA’s Pandora mission, which will revolutionize the study of exoplanet atmospheres. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Download high-resolution video and images from NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio Pandora’s telescope, jointly developed by Livermore and Corning Incorporated, and its detectors make up the mission’s heart. The detectors will capture the star’s brightness in visible light and its near-infrared spectrum at the same time, while also obtaining a near-infrared spectrum from the planet when it transits the star. Over the course of its year-long primary mission, Pandora will observe at least 20 exoplanets 10 times with a long-duration stare covering 24 hours, with a transit included in each observation. “Pandora’s advantage is its ability to observe targets for extended periods at multiple wavelengths, something high-demand flagship missions like Webb cannot regularly do,” said Knicole Colón, the mission’s project scientist at NASA Goddard. “Combining Pandora and Webb data will uniquely enable scientists to determine the properties of stellar surfaces and cleanly separate star and planetary signals.” Pandora is led by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory provides the mission’s project management and engineering. Pandora’s telescope was manufactured by Corning and developed collaboratively with Livermore, which also developed the imaging detector assemblies, the mission’s control electronics, and all supporting thermal and mechanical subsystems. The infrared sensor was provided by NASA Goddard. Blue Canyon Technologies provided the bus, performed spacecraft assembly, integration and environmental testing, and is providing mission operations support. NASA’s Ames Research Center in California’s Silicon Valley performs the mission’s data processing. Pandora’s science data is available at the NASA Exoplanet Archive , which is operated by IPAC at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. The University of Arizona leads mission operations for Pandora and contributes to its science program. Many additional universities also support the science team. To learn more about the Pandora mission, please visit: https://science.nasa.gov/mission/pandora/ Facebook logo @NASAUniverse @NASAUniverse Instagram logo @NASAUniverse Share Details Last Updated Aug 27, 2026 Editor Francis Reddy Contact Alise Fisher alise.m.fisher@nasa.gov Related Terms Pandora Mission Astrophysics Exoplanet Atmosphere Exoplanet Science Goddard Space Flight Center The Universe

4 Min Read NASA Telescopes Create Colorful ‘Craft’ From Nearby Nebula Megan Watzke Aug 11, 2026 Article Like a collage made of layered sheets of colored cellophane, a vibrant new image layers observations of a famous star-forming nebula from NASA space telescopes. The resulting cosmic “craft” reveals new details about the star formation region known as 30 Doradus, or the Tarantula Nebula. Located in the Large Magellanic Cloud, a small neighbor galaxy to the Milky Way about 160,000 light-years from Earth, the Tarantula has thousands of young stars embedded in a vibrant honeycomb-like structure of gas and dust. X-ray: NASA/CXC/Ohio State Univ./J. Rodriguez et al; Infrared: NASA/ESA/CSA/STScI; Optical: NASA/ESA/STScI; Image Processing: NASA/CXC/SAO/P. Edmonds The new composite image contains X-rays from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, which has repeatedly observed the Tarantula Nebula over the course of its mission, in the layer that appears in blue. The X-ray data reveals gas blown away by winds from the surfaces of young, massive stars and heated to millions of degrees by shock waves, like sonic booms from supersonic jets. The red represents infrared data from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope showing thousands of young stars, plus swaths of cool dust that will provide the ingredients to form new stars and planets. Optical data in the green layer from NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope uncovers hydrogen gas that is warmer than seen with Webb, as well as some individual stars through the nebula. The composite image shows the full Hubble and Webb images of this region, as well as a large section of the Chandra image, all recently published in a research paper in the Astrophysical Journal . In some regions the blue Chandra layer stands alone, and in others it combines with either the red Webb data or the green Hubble data. In the middle region all three images overlap to provide a holistic view in red, orange, yellow, green, and blue. Previously, astronomers had studied the amount and the impact of energy produced by winds from young, massive stars in the Tarantula Nebula. Scientists expect that much of this energy should heat gas so that it produces X-rays. However, the research paper shows that there is much less X-ray-emitting gas in the nebula than expected. This led researchers to ask: Where has this energy gone and what tamed the Tarantula Nebula? By studying the data from Chandra, Hubble, and Webb, combined with data from NASA’s retired Spitzer Space Telescope, the team concluded the Tarantula may be losing energy from several sources. First, up to half of the hot gas is leaking through the shell walls of the gas and dust structures and escaping the nebula. Next, there is stirring and mixing between the cold gas near the shell walls and some of the hot gas, lowering the overall temperature of the gas. Finally, comparisons with computer simulations suggest the Tarantula may be losing energy through conduction. This involves direct physical contact between hot and cooler material, like with a frying pan on a burner, causing the hot and cooler material to equalize in temperature. In the case of the Tarantula Nebula, the hot gas would be conducting heat by being in direct contact with the cooler gas in the shells, especially in the densest regions. This scenario does not necessarily involve mixing the hot and cooler gas. The combination of these three channels for losing large amounts of energy leads to this colorful and complex display revealed by NASA's telescopes working together. Tarantula Nebula / 30 Doradus, cropped version. X-ray: NASA/CXC/Ohio State Univ./J. Rodriguez et al; Infrared: NASA/ESA/CSA/STScI; Optical: NASA/ESA/STScI; Image Processing: NASA/CXC/SAO/P. Edmonds The paper describing these results was led by Jennifer Rodriguez of The Ohio State University in Columbus. Additional authors on the paper include Laura Lopez, Ohio State; Lachlan Lancaster, Columbia University in New York City; Anna Rosen, San Diego State University; Omnaraynai Nayak, Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore; Sebastian Lopez, Ohio State; Tyler Holland-Ashford, NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; and Trinity Webb, Ohio State. NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, manages the Chandra program. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory's Chandra X-ray Center controls science operations from Cambridge, Massachusetts, and flight operations from Burlington, Massachusetts. To learn more about Chandra, visit: https://nasa.gov/chandra Share Details Last Updated Aug 14, 2026 Editor Lee Mohon Contact Megan Watzke mwatzke@cfa.harvard.edu Joel Wallace joel.w.wallace@nasa.gov Location Marshall Space Flight Center Related Terms Chandra X-Ray Observatory Marshall Astrophysics Marshall Space Flight Center Nebulae The Universe Explore More 4 min read NASA Space Telescope Maps Magnetic Fields of ‘Lighthouse’ Pulsar Article 3 months ago 5 min read NASA’s Chandra Examines Milky Way at Arms’ Length Article 3 months ago 5 min read NASA’s Chandra Discovers Possible Supernova Remnant in Galactic Center Article 4 months ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Chandra X-ray Observatory The Chandra X-ray Observatory is the world's most powerful X-ray telescope. Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Universe

Explore Hubble 5 min read Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years NASA Hubble Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center Aug 17, 2026 Article About 12 billion years ago, a dwarf galaxy known as LKH collided with a young Milky Way and merged with it. This artist’s concept portrays that collision. NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope uncovered definitive evidence of this collision by studying globular star clusters. Illustration: NASA, ESA, Joseph Olmsted (STScI) Our home galaxy, the Milky Way, grew to its current size in part by consuming smaller galaxies. Now, new data from NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope shows definitive evidence of a dwarf galaxy merging with the young Milky Way galaxy in the earliest phases of its evolution. This finding extends our knowledge of our galaxy’s history 1.8 billion years farther back in time than before. The results published Monday in the journal Nature Astronomy . The Milky Way today is a massive spiral galaxy home to hundreds of billions of stars. However, our galaxy wasn’t always so large; it has grown by forming new stars from its gas clouds as well as collecting stars, gas, and dark matter from other galaxies through mergers. The most recent massive merger in our galaxy’s history took place with the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy, beginning over 6 billion years ago and still ongoing today. Looking back into the even more distant past, researchers learned that the Milky Way galaxy consumed another dwarf galaxy called Gaia-Sausage-Enceladus 10 billion years ago. This ancient merger greatly affected the structure of our galaxy’s disk of stars. Other, smaller mergers occurred between these two. But our galaxy’s history doesn’t stop there. Both observations and simulations have suggested that another large merger preceded these two, though the specifics of the event have been heavily debated. Now, Hubble has uncovered definitive evidence of an earlier merger that occurred about 11.8 billion years ago, or just 2 billion years after the big bang. “Our home is the Milky Way galaxy, but we do not know how our house was built,” said Davide Massari, lead author, Astrophysics and Space Science Observatory of Bologna in Italy. “In this paper we discover where the first significant batch of bricks came from: a dwarf galaxy that we call LKH.” Cosmic archaeological sites Immense astronomical surveys and precision data from spacecraft like ESA’s (European Space Agency’s) Gaia mission have been instrumental in piecing together the history of our galaxy. The farther back into our galaxy’s history that scientists attempt to look, the more difficult it becomes to tell what happened. When our galaxy was young, it was smaller and much closer in size to the galaxies it clashed with. It was also more chaotic, and it’s possible that the signs of mergers have been erased over billions of years. It’s into this murky past that Hubble peered. Researchers used Hubble to study some of the Milky Way galaxy’s globular clusters : immense, roughly spherical collections of tens of thousands to a few million stars. Globular clusters contain some of the oldest stars in our galaxy, and they can act as cosmic archaeological sites that preserve stars from other galaxies the Milky Way galaxy has collected. “Thanks to the high resolution and depth of Hubble imaging, we could measure the age and the metal content of these clusters with unprecedented precision,” said Chiara Zerbinati, study co-author, University of Bologna in Italy. “Coupled with measurements from Gaia, this made it possible to distinguish a population of globular clusters that are different from the others. These are the clusters that were born in LKH, and they tell us when that galaxy was devoured by ours, and how massive it was.” The team analyzed Hubble observations of 39 globular clusters in the inner 20,000 light-years of our galaxy, where evidence of the most ancient mergers should be preserved. They expected this sample to contain globular clusters that formed within the young Milky Way galaxy as well as those collected from the Gaia-Sausage-Enceladus dwarf galaxy about 10 billion years ago. Using Hubble’s sensitive observations to determine each cluster’s precise age and associated metallicity — the abundance of elements heavier than helium — they determined there was a third population of globular clusters in the inner regions of our galaxy. The team found that these clusters are older than the group collected in the Gaia-Sausage-Enceladus merger, but younger than those born in the Milky Way, regardless of their metal content. These clusters, therefore, came from a separate and even earlier merger — in which the Milky Way galaxy absorbed a dwarf galaxy containing roughly 500 million times the mass of the Sun in stars, a significant fraction of our galaxy’s mass at the time. They named this dwarf galaxy Low-energy-Kraken-Heracles, or LKH, in honor of three earlier research papers that championed the idea of a merger early in our galaxy’s history. Such a large merger so early in the Milky Way galaxy’s formation has profound implications for the evolution of our galaxy. “Some past studies have argued that the earliest phases of our galaxy’s evolution were defined by stars born only in our galaxy,” says Massari. “Here, we have shown that stars born in external galaxies also need to be considered.” The team plans to continue their work to unravel the history of the Milky Way galaxy by studying its globular clusters, aiming to characterize all the massive mergers that our galaxy has experienced across cosmic history. “Hubble is observing globular clusters that have never been studied before, and this will help us characterize the merger events that are far back in time in the Milky Way galaxy’s history,” said Fernando Aguado-Agelet, co-author, University of Vigo and the University of La Laguna in Spain. The Hubble Space Telescope has been operating for more than three decades and continues to make ground-breaking discoveries that shape our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble is a project of international cooperation between NASA and ESA (European Space Agency). NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, manages the telescope and mission operations. Lockheed Martin Space also supports mission operations at Goddard. The Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, which is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, conducts Hubble science operations for NASA. Facebook logo @NASAHubble @NASAHubble Instagram logo @NASAHubble Related Images & Videos LKH Milky Way Merger Illustration About 12 billion years ago, a dwarf galaxy known as LKH collided with a young Milky Way and merged with it. This artist’s concept portrays that collision. NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope uncovered definitive evidence of this collision by studying globular star clusters. Share Details Last Updated Aug 18, 2026 Editor Andrea Gianopoulos Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Claire Andreoli NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland claire.andreoli@nasa.gov Bethany Downer ESA/Hubble Baltimore, US Christine Pulliam Space Telescope Science Institute Baltimore, Maryland Related Terms Hubble Space Telescope Astrophysics Astrophysics Division Galaxies Globular Clusters Goddard Space Flight Center Star Clusters The Milky Way Related Links and Documents This story on ESA/Hubble’s website. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Hubble Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble Science Highlights Hubble's most notable scientific discoveries reflect the broad range of research and the breakthroughs it has achieved. Hubble Images Explore Hubble's iconic images of the universe, and view photos of mission operations and astronauts servicing Hubble in space. Hubble News

Explore Webb 4 Min Read Lion Nebula Roars to Life With NASA’s Webb NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope imaged the planetary nebula NGC 2392, the Lion Nebula, using the observatory’s NIRCam and MIRI instruments. The central star’s remains are responsible for the nebula’s structure, including a lion face-shaped bubble of ionized gas and dust “mane.” Credits: Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI; Image Processing: Alyssa Pagan (STScI) NASA Webb Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center Aug 10, 2026 Article Contents Lion Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Image) Lion Nebula (MIRI Image) Downloads & Related Information Related Links Observing across the starry “plains” of space, NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has taken new images of NGC 2392, nicknamed the Lion Nebula. NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope previously viewed this planetary nebula in 2000, imaging the lion face-shaped target in visible light and revealing features such as the “mane” of hazy, comet-shaped objects. Now Webb has captured a clearer, more detailed view of the Lion Nebula due to its high-resolution imaging. Lion Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope imaged the planetary nebula NGC 2392, the Lion Nebula, using the observatory’s NIRCam and MIRI instruments. The central star’s remains are responsible for the nebula’s structure, including a lion face-shaped bubble of ionized gas and dust “mane.” Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI; Image Processing: Alyssa Pagan (STScI) At first glance the nebula’s overall structure in Webb’s infrared images, with both the NIRCam (Near Infrared Camera) and MIRI (Mid Infrared Instrument) instruments, may look quite similar to Hubble’s earlier visible-light view. However, Webb’s infrared vision highlights features like compact clumps of dust and a haze of ionized gas. It’s taken several thousand years for this collection of gas and dust to reach its current shape, and the nebula’s components continue to be altered. The source of these constant changes and the reason for the Lion Nebula’s distinct appearance is located at the center: the remains of a dying star. Though it looks like the button nose of the lion, its energy and radiation are powering the intricate structures seen here. Lion Nebula (MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s mid-infrared image of planetary nebula NGC 2392, nicknamed the Lion Nebula, highlights the varying dust structures. Some dust is being destroyed by the dying central star’s radiation, while some dust filaments manage to survive. Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI; Image Processing: Alyssa Pagan (STScI) Massive stars undergo supernova explosions at the end of their lives, but these kinds of events are few and far in between. Most of the universe’s stars have lower masses, like the one belonging to NGC 2392. When a lower-mass star can no longer sustain itself with nuclear reactions in its core, the star becomes unstable and pulsates, losing its mass by shedding its outer layers, which then turn into shells of gas and dust called a planetary nebula. (Stars at this life stage are responsible for producing much of the universe’s observable dust.) The star’s radiation drives the ejected material away, leaving behind the very hot stellar core, also known as a white dwarf . In the Lion Nebula’s case, the death of the oxygen-rich central star has left behind a white dwarf that is “cooking” everything from the inside and producing a bubble of ionized gas as it does. The gas bubble, which forms the lion’s face, is expanding over time and destroying dust that is in its path. Understanding why the swept-up gas has a complex structure of rings and shells, a common feature in planetary nebulae, is an ongoing endeavor. The mane of the lion is the interior of a dust shell that is being illuminated by the white dwarf at the center. The tufts of hair, which look like cometary tails of material, are compact clumps of dust that have survived the stellar core’s radiation and protect the material that lies behind them. Webb’s imagery “freezes” this planetary nebula in time, though the star’s death, and its tumultuous effects, go on. NGC 2392 will continue to undergo changes as its gas and dust migrate away from the stellar core. Astronomers estimate the lion will eventually disperse in approximately 10,000 years — a relatively short period in astronomical terms. The James Webb Space Telescope is the world’s premier space science observatory. Webb is solving mysteries in our solar system, looking beyond to distant worlds around other stars, and probing the mysterious structures and origins of our universe and our place in it. Webb is an international program led by NASA with its partners, ESA (European Space Agency) and CSA (Canadian Space Agency). To learn more about Webb, visit: https://science.nasa.gov/webb Downloads & Related Information The following sections contain links to download this article's images and videos in all available resolutions followed by related information links, media contacts, and if available, research paper and Spanish translation links. Related Images & Videos Lion Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope imaged the planetary nebula NGC 2392, the Lion Nebula, using the observatory’s NIRCam and MIRI instruments. The central star’s remains are responsible for the nebula’s structure, including a lion face-shaped bubble of ionized gas and dust “mane.” Lion Nebula (MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s mid-infrared image of planetary nebula NGC 2392, nicknamed the Lion Nebula, highlights the varying dust structures. Some dust is being destroyed by the dying central star’s radiation, while some dust filaments manage to survive. Related Links Explore more: Sonification of NGC 2392 View more: Hubble Image of NGC 2392 View more: Chandra X-ray Observatory Image of NGC 2392 More Webb: News | Images | Science | Home Page Share Details Last Updated Sep 21, 2026 Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Laura Betz NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland laura.e.betz@nasa.gov Abigail Major Space Telescope Science Institute Baltimore, Maryland Christine Pulliam Space Telescope Science Institute Baltimore, Maryland Related Terms James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Astrophysics Goddard Space Flight Center Planetary Nebulae Science & Research The Universe Keep Exploring Related Topics James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Stars Stars Stories Universe

Roman Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics. Active Mission NEWS Get the Latest Updates from the Roman Blog! HOW Roman's Instruments and What They Can Do SCIENCE Investigate Dark Matter, Dark Energy, Exoplanets, and Other Mysteries Named after NASA’s first chief astronomer, the ‘mother of the Hubble Space Telescope,’ the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will have a field of view at least 100 times larger than Hubble's, potentially measuring light from a billion galaxies in its lifetime. This observatory will also be able to block starlight to directly see exoplanets and planet-forming disks, complete a statistical census of planetary systems in our galaxy, and settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and infrared astrophysics. Type Space Telescope Launch August 30, 2026 Target Universe, Exoplanets Objective Settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics Where’s Roman? Learn More About Roman Commissioning Unable to render the provided source Roman Stories Explore All Roman Stories Blog 3 Min Read NASA’s Roman Team Confirms Ground Stations Receiving Data 22 Min Read Encore: Welcome to the Dark Side 5 Min Read NASA Activates Roman’s Primary Instrument, Checks Out Coronagraph Blog 3 Min Read Fuel Savings Double Potential Lifetime for NASA’s Roman Mission Blog 3 Min Read Help Refine Data from Space Telescopes with Artifact InSPECtor Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Exoplanets Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Galaxies

Explore Webb James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the history of our Universe. Active Mission Featured Content Latest News Latest Images Webb studies every phase in the history of our Universe, ranging from the first luminous glows after the Big Bang, to the formation of solar systems capable of supporting life on planets like Earth, to the evolution of our own Solar System. Webb launched on Dec. 25th 2021. It does not orbit around the Earth like the Hubble Space Telescope, it orbits the Sun 1.5 million kilometers (1 million miles) away from the Earth at what is called the second Lagrange point or L2. Mission Type Astrophysics Partners NASA/ESA/CSA Launch Dec 25, 2021 Arrival at L2 Jan 24, 2022 Key Facts Fact Sheet Premiere Telescope of Next Decade extending the tantalizing discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope. Folding Design So big it has to fold origami-style to fit in the rocket and will unfold like a “Transformer” in space. 1.5 Million km Webb orbits the Sun 1.5 million kilometers from the Earth. (Hubble orbits 560 kilometers above the Earth.) SPF 1 Million Webb has a 5-layer sunshield that protects the telescope from the infrared radiation of the Sun, Earth, and Moon; like having sun protection of SPF 1 million. Unprecedented Sensitivity iIt will peer back in time over 13.5 billion years to see the first galaxies born after the Big Bang.in the ISS. Featured Image NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope recently observed IC 348, a star-forming region just 1,000 light-years away from Earth. Webb’s sharp vision revealed tiny brown dwarfs, some just twice Jupiter’s mass, and young stars ejecting powerful jets crashing into surrounding gas and dust. Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, Kevin Luhman (PSU), Catarina Alves de Oliveira (ESA), Mahdi Zamani (ESA/Webb) More Webb Images Featured Story NASA’s Webb Reveals Dynamic Panorama of Star Formation This starry view of the nearby star-forming region IC 348 is one of the largest images released to date from… Read the Story Latest News The feed below is a mix of Webb Science Releases and associated images/videos, Webb Science Blogs, Webb press releases and articles tagged with "James Webb Space Telescope" . To filter out everything except the Webb Science Releases (or Science Blogs) - simply select that filter check box. Webb Science Releases, images, videos and Webb's Science Blogs can also be filtered by Webb's four primary science themes . Filter, Search and Sort Notes: Initial filtered results displayed below show articles that match all of the filters listed for all dates. Once one or more article type filters checked (Images, Science Blogs, Science Releases, Videos), only articles that match the checked filters (logical ORd) are displayed within the date range if selected. When a Webb-Theme is selected, that filters a subset of the article types selected. The "Search Latest Content" box searches for the terms entered within the subset of filtered articles. You can also sort the results by date in descending (newest first) or ascending (oldest first). Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Centaurus A Poster Download and print a mini poster featuring an image of the galaxy Centaurus A captured in 2026 by NASA's James… Sep 25, 2026 Image NASA’s Webb Reveals Dynamic Panorama of Star Formation This starry view of the nearby star-forming region IC 348 is one of the largest images released to date from… Sep 15, 2026 Article IC 348 (NIRCam Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope recently observed IC 348, a star-forming region just 1,000 light-years away from Earth. Webb’s sharp… Sep 15, 2026 Image IC 348 Collage This collage features a collection of insets from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s image of star-forming region IC 348: embedded… Sep 15, 2026 Image NASA’s Hubble, Webb Find Far-out Solar System Objects ‘Remember’ Past For the first time, scientists used the joint power of NASA’s Hubble and James Webb Space Telescopes to study some… Sep 8, 2026 Article Trans-Neptunian Object Illustration This artist’s concept depicts a Trans-Neptunian Object, a small, faint, icy body orbiting the Sun beyond the orbit of Neptune.… Sep 8, 2026 Image Fast and Furious Star Formation in Starburst Galaxies While our Sun was born almost five billion years ago, there are brand new stars forming today. Within our Milky… Aug 26, 2026 Video Webb Opens Treasure Chest NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope captured this Aug. 6, 2026, infrared image of part of the Carina Nebula, a star-forming… Aug 21, 2026 Image Article Lion Nebula Roars to Life With NASA’s Webb Observing across the starry “plains” of space, NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has taken new images of NGC 2392, nicknamed… Aug 10, 2026 Article Lion Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope imaged the planetary nebula NGC 2392, the Lion Nebula, using the observatory’s NIRCam and MIRI… Aug 10, 2026 Image Lion Nebula (MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s mid-infrared image of planetary nebula NGC 2392, nicknamed the Lion Nebula, highlights the varying dust… Aug 10, 2026 Image Webb Unravels Small Cosmic Details With Interferometry Observing Mode One of the most recognizable features of NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope is its large, segmented, gold-coated mirror, which delivers… Aug 4, 2026 Blog Webb's Blog This feed only contains articles from Webb's Blog which offers an insider's point of view covering a variety of topics. The feed below supports a deeper dive into Webb's Blog which contains early release science (not yet peer reviewed) as well as blogs on Webb Mission Operations and Webb Engineering posts - you can also filter Webb Science Blogs by Webb's four primary science themes . Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Webb Unravels Small Cosmic Details With Interferometry Observing Mode One of the most recognizable features of NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope is its large, segmented, gold-coated mirror, which delivers… Aug 4, 2026 Blog NASA’s Webb Detects Methane on Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has collected its first mid-infrared chemical fingerprint of an interstellar object during a recent revisit… Jun 1, 2026 Blog How NASA’s Webb Helped Rule Out Asteroid’s Chance of 2032 Lunar Impact Editor’s Note: This post highlights data from Webb science in progress, which has not yet been through the peer-review process.… Mar 6, 2026 Blog New NASA Asteroid Observations Eliminate Chance of 2032 Lunar Impact Using data from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope observations collected on Feb. 18 and 26, experts from NASA’s Center for… Mar 5, 2026 Blog NASA’s Webb Space Telescope Observes Interstellar Comet NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope observed interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS Aug. 6, with its Near-Infrared Spectrograph instrument. The research team has… Aug 25, 2025 Blog New Moon Discovered Orbiting Uranus Using NASA’s Webb Telescope Editor’s Note: This post highlights data from Webb science in progress, which has not yet been through the peer-review process.… Aug 19, 2025 Blog NASA’s Webb Finds Possible ‘Direct Collapse’ Black Hole Editor’s Note: This post highlights a combination of peer-reviewed results and data from Webb science in progress, which has not… Jul 15, 2025 Blog NASA’s Webb Observations Update Asteroid 2024 YR4’s Lunar Impact Odds While asteroid 2024 YR4 is currently too distant to detect with telescopes from Earth, NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope collected one… Jun 5, 2025 Blog How NASA’s Webb Telescope Supports Our Search for Life Beyond Earth This artist’s concept shows what exoplanet K2-18 b could look like based on science data. K2-18 b, an exoplanet 8.6… Apr 18, 2025 Blog NASA’s Webb Finds Asteroid 2024 YR4 Is Building-Sized Editor’s Note: This post highlights data from Webb science in progress, which has not yet been through the peer-review process. These… Apr 2, 2025 Blog NASA’s Webb Reveals the Ancient Surfaces of Trans-Neptunian Objects Trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) are icy bodies ranging in size from Pluto and Eris (dwarf planets with diameters of about 1,500… Feb 12, 2025 Blog Monitoring Webb’s Mirrors for Optimal Optics NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope is the largest and most powerful telescope ever launched to space. Its mirror is composed… Nov 8, 2024 Blog Latest 2026 Images The image below is a SLIDESHOW. Hover over the image to see the image title and controls. Click the image to go to a detail page with more info and the ability to download the image at various resolutions (click the downward arrow icon in lower right corner). View Slideshow as Thumbnail Gallery (new tab) More Webb Images Science Images By Year Webb Science image slideshows by year. First Images Webb's first science images released in July of 2022 just after commissioning was completed. More Webb Images Images from Webb's testing and commissioning, road to launch from the US to ESA's launch facility in French Guiana, Webb's launch, Webb's development and more. About Webb Images The where, why and how of Webb images. Search Webb Science Images Search and filter Webb science images and image products using keywords, date ranges, astronomoical objects and more. Webb Observation tracking TOOL What is Webb Observing? See current, upcoming and recent past observations scientists are making with the Webb Space Telescope. View details about each observation's science focus areas, the instruments used and more. View the Tool About The Webb Mission Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the history of our Universe, ranging from the first luminous glows after the Big Bang, to the formation of solar systems capable of supporting life on planets like Earth, to the evolution of our own Solar System. Learn More This is a photo of one of the James Webb Space Telescope's primary mirror segments coated with gold by Quantum Coating Incorporated. It's NOT a flight segment, it's the engineering design unit. The photo was taken at BATC by Drew Noel. Photo by Drew Noel About Webb's Science Goals The James Webb Space Telescope is a giant leap forward in our quest to understand the Universe and our origins. Webb is examining every phase of cosmic history: from the first luminous glows after the Big Bang to the formation of galaxies, stars, and planets to the evolution of our own solar system. Learn about the 4 main science themes for Webb. Learn More NASA’s Webb Captures Dying Star’s Final ‘Performance’ in Fine Detail NASA, ESA, CSA, and STScI About The Spacecraft The Webb Space Telescope is the largest, most powerful and most complex telescope ever launched into space . It's design and development history stretches back before the Hubble Space Telescope was launched. Learn about the design, the major components and subsystems of Webb and see Webb in 3d in a 3d Solar System. Learn More About The International Webb Team Webb is for the world, and from the world. Thousands of skilled scientists, engineers and technicians from 14 countries (and more than 29 U.S. states, and Washington, D.C.) contributed to the design, build, test, integration, launch, commissioning and operations of Webb. It is a joint NASA/ESA/CSA mission. Assembly and testing of the mirror and instruments occurred at NASA Goddard (GSFC). Learn More A full disk view of the earth from GOES 16, GOES East on the vernal Equinox. NOAA / NASA Do NASA Science with Galaxy Zoo! Join NASA researchers and help discover the secrets of the universe. NASA invites people of all ages and backgrounds to participate in authentic NASA research via "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, where volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of important scientific discoveries! As a part of the Galaxy Zoo project, you can help classify the latest images of galaxies from NASA's Webb telescope. Learn how you can get involved Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Missions Humans in Space Climate Change Solar System

Explore This Section The Habitable Zone Contents Fast facts: What is the Habitable Zone? Where Are We Looking for Life, and Why? Fast facts: What is the Habitable Zone? The definition of “habitable zone” is the distance from a star at which liquid water could exist on orbiting planets’ surfaces. Habitable zones are also known as “Goldilocks zones,” where conditions might be just right — not too hot, not too cold — for life. There's a helpful concept we use to help understand what distance from a given star you might expect to find planets with liquid water on their surface – liquid water being essential for life as we know it. It's called the habitable zone. Every star has a habitable zone, but where that zone lies is different for stars of different sizes and brightness. NASA/JPL-Caltech When searching for possibly habitable exoplanets, it helps to start with worlds similar to our own. But what does “similar” mean? Many rocky planets have been detected in Earth’s size-range: a point in favor of possible life. Based on what we’ve observed in our own solar system, large, gaseous worlds like Jupiter seem far less likely to offer habitable conditions. But most of these Earth-sized worlds have been detected orbiting red-dwarf stars; Earth-sized planets in wide orbits around Sun-like stars are much harder to detect. And, of course, when talking about habitable exoplanets, we’re really talking about their stars, the dominant force in any planetary system. Habitable zones potentially capable of hosting life-bearing planets are wider for hotter stars. Smaller, dimmer red dwarfs, the most common type in our Milky Way galaxy, have much tighter habitable zones as in the TRAPPIST-1 system. Planets in a red dwarf's comparatively narrow habitable zone, which is very close to the star, are exposed to extreme levels of X-ray and ultraviolet (UV) radiation, which can be up to hundreds of thousands of times more intense than what Earth receives from the Sun. This infographic compares the characteristics of three classes of stars in our galaxy: Sunlike stars are classified as G stars; stars less massive and cooler than our Sun are K dwarfs; and even fainter and cooler stars are the reddish M dwarfs. NASA, ESA and Z. Levy (STScI) Where Are We Looking for Life, and Why? An old joke offers an answer: Asked why, on a dark night, he was looking for his missing car keys beneath a street lamp, the man answered, "because the light's better." Life on other planets might be like nothing on Earth – it could be life as we don't know it . But it makes sense, at least at first, to search for something more familiar. Life as we know it should be easier to find. And "the light's better" in the habitable zone, or the area around a star where planetary surface temperatures could allow the pooling of water. Other similarities to Earth come into sharper focus in the search for life. Many rocky planets have been detected in Earth’s size-range: a point in favor of possible life. Based on what we’ve observed in our own solar system, large, gaseous worlds like Jupiter seem far less likely to offer habitable conditions. But most of these Earth-sized worlds have been detected orbiting red-dwarf stars; Earth-sized planets in wide orbits around Sun-like stars are much harder to detect. Yet these red-dwarfs have a potentially deadly habit, especially in their younger years: Powerful flares tend to erupt with some frequency from their surfaces. These could sterilize closely orbiting planets where life had only begun to get a toehold. That’s a strike against possible life. Because our Sun has nurtured life on Earth for nearly 4 billion years, conventional wisdom would suggest that stars like it would be prime candidates in the search for other potentially habitable worlds. G-type yellow stars like our Sun, however, are shorter-lived and less common in our galaxy. The artist's conception shows a hypothetical planet with two moons orbiting in the habitable zone of a red dwarf star. More about stars › Stars slightly cooler and less luminous than our Sun — called orange dwarfs — are considered by some scientists as potentially better for advanced life. They can burn steadily for tens of billions of years. This opens up a vast timescape for biological evolution to pursue an infinity of experiments for yielding robust life forms. And, for every star like our Sun there are three times as many orange dwarfs in the Milky Way. K dwarfs, are the true "Goldilocks stars," said Edward Guinan of Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania. "K-dwarf stars are in the 'sweet spot,' with properties intermediate between the rarer, more luminous, but shorter-lived solar-type stars (G stars) and the more numerous red dwarf stars (M stars). The K stars, especially the warmer ones, have the best of all worlds. If you are looking for planets with habitability, the abundance of K stars pump up your chances of finding life." Exoplanet temperature, size, star type: the galaxy offers up a menu of worlds that echo aspects of our own, yet at the same time are vastly different. Traditional picture of the habitable zone – not too hot, not too cold. NASA Webb telescope investigation No Atmosphere Seen on TRAPPIST-1 D; Research Continues on Its Earth-Sized Siblings With seven-Earth sized worlds in the habitable zone, the TRAPPIST-1 exoplanet system has compelled attention since its 2017 discovery. Now, preliminary data from the James Webb Space Telescope shows the “third rock” in this distant solar system, TRAPPIST-1 d, apparently has no atmosphere, but scientists are continuing their studies, and the search for potential atmospheres and water on the system’s outer planets. Read the article: ‘Webb Narrows Atmospheric Possibilities for Earth-sized Exoplanet TRAPPIST-1 d’ This artist’s concept depicts planet TRAPPIST-1 d passing in front of its turbulent star, with other members of the closely packed system shown in the background. The TRAPPIST-1 system is intriguing to scientists for a few reasons. Not only does the system have seven Earth-sized rocky worlds, but its star is a red dwarf, the most common type of star in the Milky Way galaxy. If an Earth-sized world can maintain an atmosphere here, and thus have the potential for liquid surface water, the chance of finding similar worlds throughout the galaxy is much higher. NASA, ESA, CSA, Joseph Olmsted (STScI) Learn More about the TRAPPIST-1 system TRAPPIST-1 d Interactive View a 3-D interactive representation of this planet, from NASA's Eyes on Exoplanets TRAPPIST-1 Archive Read more about this exoplanet system Target Star catalog The Hunt for Habitable Worlds The Target Star Catalog is a guide to intriguing nearby stars that astronomers want to study with future missions, such as the Habitable Worlds Observatory, which will be built specifically to find and observe Earth-like exoplanets, to search for signs of life. Browse the Target Star Catalog An artist's rendering of a red dwarf or M star, with three exoplanets orbiting. About 75 percent of all stars in the sky are the cooler, smaller red dwarfs. NASA/JPL-Caltech Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Universe Habitable Worlds Observatory Stars Astrobiology

Explore This Section Why We Search Contents NASA's Search for Life Finding Another Blue and White Marble Partners in the Search for Life Whether life exists beyond Earth is one of the most profound questions of all time. The answer will change us forever — whether it reveals a universe rich with life, one in which life is rare and fragile, or even a universe in which we can find no other life at all. The hunt for an answer also is revealing important details about our own place in the universe — where we came from, how life came about and, perhaps, where we’re headed. This artistic concept compares Earth (left) to Kepler-452b, which is about 60 percent larger. The illustration represents one possible appearance for Kepler-452b – scientists do not know whether the planet has oceans and continents like Earth. Both planets orbit a G2-type star of about the same temperature; however, the star hosting Kepler-452b is 6 billion years old, 1.5 billion years older than our sun. As stars age, they become larger, hotter and brighter, as represented in the illustration. Kepler-452b's star appears a bit larger and brighter. NASA/Ames/JPL-Caltech/T. Pyle The years and decades ahead will bring us ever closer to the ultimate in self-reflection: a mirror image of our own planet Earth. A small, rocky world with clouds, oceans and an atmosphere bearing signs of possible life. This might be a combination of gases – oxygen, carbon dioxide and methane – that, seen by themselves, don't tell us very much, but together speak volumes. Such a world might be hundreds of light-years away, perhaps forever out of reach. But the molecular evidence we read in its atmosphere, using ever more acute technology, could give us the answer we've awaited since the dawn of humanity: No, we are not alone. A photo of Earth taken Feb. 14, 1990, by NASA’s Voyager 1 at a distance of 3.7 billion miles (6 billion kilometers) from the Sun. The image inspired the title of scientist Carl Sagan's book, "Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space," in which he wrote: "Look again at that dot. That's here. That's home. That's us." NASA/JPL-Caltech NASA's Search for Life The ultimate goal of NASA's Exoplanet Program is to find unmistakable signs of current life. Exoplanets’ own skies could hold such signs, waiting to be revealed by detailed analysis of the atmospheres of planets well beyond our solar system. When we analyze light shot by a star through the atmosphere of a distant planet, a technique known as transmission spectroscopy, the effect looks like a barcode. The slices missing from the light spectrum tell us which ingredients are present in the alien atmosphere. One pattern of black gaps might indicate methane, another, oxygen. Seeing those together could be a strong argument for the presence of life. Or we might read a barcode that shows the burning of hydrocarbons; in other words, smog. Light from exoplanets, if passed through a prism, can be spread out into a rainbow of colors called a spectrum. Different colors correspond to different wavelengths of light. Missing colors show up as black lines, indicating specific gases are present, because each gas absorbs light in a specific wavelength (or color). Finding Another Blue and White Marble For a world to have life as we know it, we understand that it would need liquid water on the surface, however, it might not look anything like Earth. The planet would most likely exist in the “habitable zone” of the star it orbits, where it is neither too close nor too far from its star. Also called the Goldilock’s zone, this is the area around a star in which liquid water could exist on planets over geological timescales and where its atmosphere could contain the right balance of gases that could support life. Partners in the Search for Life NASA scientists hunting for life beyond Earth form a broad coalition: those investigating our solar system , ancient or extreme life forms on Earth, and even our Sun. Signs of life might be found on Mars, Jupiter's moon Europa or Saturn's moon Enceladus, and potential future missions are in the conceptual or planning stages. Better understanding of early Earth life , or even living "extremophiles," could inform our attempts to detect life beyond our planet. And truly knowing distant exoplanets requires knowledge of the stars they orbit ; greater understanding of our Sun will help us to know other stars. Webb Narrows Atmospheric Possibilities for Earth-sized Exoplanet TRAPPIST-1 d The exoplanet TRAPPIST-1 d intrigues astronomers looking for possibly habitable worlds beyond our solar system, because it is similar in size to Earth, rocky, and resides in the "Goldilocks zone" around its star. But similarities may end there — a recent study using data from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope indicates it does not have an Earth-like atmosphere. Learn More About the TRAPPIST-1 d Findings about Webb Narrows Atmospheric Possibilities for Earth-sized Exoplanet TRAPPIST-1 d Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore This Section Exoplanet Catalog This exoplanetary encyclopedia — continuously updated, with more than 6,000 entries — combines interactive 3D models and detailed data on all confirmed exoplanets. When you select a planet’s name, see a visualization of each world and system, along with vital statistics. Filter by exoplanet type, by discovery method, or by the mission or facility that found it. key to exoplanet types Terrestrial A type of exoplanet made of rock or metal, smaller than Earth, possibly with oceans or atmospheres (artist's concept). Super Earth Super-Earth exoplanets are also rocky, but between Earth and Neptune in size (artist's concept). Neptune-like This variety of exoplanet is similar in size to Uranus and Neptune, with an atmosphere of mostly hydrogen or helium (artist's concept). Gas Giant Gas Giant exoplanets are as massive as Saturn or Jupiter, or larger; this category also includes "hot Jupiters," which orbit close to their stars (artist's concept). Unknown Illustration of an exoplanet whose type is unknown. Filters KMT-2023-BLG-1118L b Parsecs from Earth: 7200 Planet Mass: 0.21 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 TOI-426 c Parsecs from Earth: 113.59 Planet Mass: 1.39698023 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: 10.116 Discovery Date: 2026 TOI-426 b Parsecs from Earth: 113.59 Planet Mass: 6.7 Earths Stellar Magnitude: 10.116 Discovery Date: 2026 K2-232 c Parsecs from Earth: 130.72 Planet Mass: 5.31 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: 9.822 Discovery Date: 2026 KMT-2023-BLG-0084L b Parsecs from Earth: 4000 Planet Mass: 2.5 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 KMT-2023-BLG-1810L b Parsecs from Earth: 7000 Planet Mass: 7.24 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 KMT-2025-BLG-2272L b Parsecs from Earth: 6620 Planet Mass: 2.47 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 KMT-2025-BLG-0030L b Parsecs from Earth: 6720 Planet Mass: 1.15 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 KMT-2025-BLG-0026L b Parsecs from Earth: 7280 Planet Mass: 2.13 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 OGLE-2016-BLG-0261L b Parsecs from Earth: 7850 Planet Mass: 0.21 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 HD 715 b Parsecs from Earth: 167.253 Planet Mass: 0.635 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: 8.703 Discovery Date: 2026 HD 278555 b Parsecs from Earth: 289.829 Planet Mass: 0.84 Jupiters Stellar Magnitude: 11.046 Discovery Date: 2026 KMT-2025-BLG-1160L b Parsecs from Earth: 6580 Planet Mass: 25.36 Earths Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 KMT-2025-BLG-0975L b Parsecs from Earth: 7923 Planet Mass: 29.8 Earths Stellar Magnitude: Unknown Discovery Date: 2026 TOI-4409 b Parsecs from Earth: 179.419 Planet Mass: 14.93793513 Earths Stellar Magnitude: 12.691 Discovery Date: 2026 For each exoplanet listed above, the thumbnail image (artist's concept) links to an interactive 3D representation of the planet. When you get to that detail page with the 3D visualization, learn more about the exoplanet — including how long it would take to get there from Earth — by selecting the “Learn More” button next to the exoplanet's name . Do NASA Science and Explore Key Questions about the Universe 01 Exoplanet Watch NASA invites people of all ages and backgrounds to participate in authentic NASA research via "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, where volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of important scientific discoveries. As a part of the Exoplanet Watch project, you'll help scientists track and study exoplanets as they transit in front of stars. Get Involved 02 UNITE Do you have your own telescope? You can help observe newly discovered exoplanets and collect information about their transits to help characterize their orbits. UNITE participants coordinate with other citizen scientists and researchers around the globe to track and learn about these new worlds. Learn More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Exoplanet Stories The Habitable Zone Search for Life NASA Exoplanet Science Institute (NExScI)

Explore This Section Proxima Centauri b Unable to render the provided source Proxima Centauri b is a super Earth exoplanet that orbits an M-type star. Its mass is 1.07 Earths, it takes 11.2 days to complete one orbit of its star, and is 0.04856 AU from its star. Its discovery was announced in 2016. Planet Radius: 1.02 x Earth (estimate) Planet Type: Super Earth Discovery Method: Radial Velocity Planet Mass: 1.055 Earths Discovery Date: 2016 Orbital Radius: 0.04848 AU Orbital Period: 11.2 days Eccentricity: 0.0 Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore This Section 55 Cancri b Unable to render the provided source 55 Cancri b is a gas giant exoplanet that orbits a K-type star. Its mass is 0.8306 Jupiters, it takes 14.7 days to complete one orbit of its star, and is 0.1134 AU from its star. Its discovery was announced in 1996. Planet Radius: 1.24 x Jupiter (estimate) Planet Type: Gas Giant Discovery Method: Radial Velocity Planet Mass: 0.8306 Jupiters Discovery Date: 1996 Orbital Radius: 0.118 AU Orbital Period: 14.7 days Eccentricity: 0.0 Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore This Section PSR B1257+12 b Unable to render the provided source PSR B1257+12 b, along with fellow doomed worlds, were among the first and creepiest to be discovered as they orbit an undead star known as a pulsar. Pulsar planets like Poltergeist and its neighboring worlds, Phobetor and Draugr, are consumed with constant radiation from the star’s core. Planet Radius: 0.338 x Earth (estimate) Planet Type: Terrestrial Discovery Method: Pulsar Timing Planet Mass: 0.02 Earths Discovery Date: 1994 Orbital Radius: 0.19 AU Orbital Period: 25.3 days Eccentricity: 0.0 Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Roman Dark Matter Scientists are trying to determine what dark matter is made of, but our current understanding has many gaps. Roman will provide clarity by exploring the structure and distribution of both normal matter and dark matter across space and time. What is Dark Matter? Scientists first suspected dark matter’s existence over 80 years ago when Swiss-American astronomer Fritz Zwicky observed that galaxies in the Coma cluster were moving so quickly they should have been flung away into space – yet they remained gravitationally bound to the cluster by unseen matter. Then in the 1970s, American astronomer Vera Rubin discovered the same type of problem in individual spiral galaxies. Stars toward the edge of the galaxy move too fast to be held in by the galaxy’s luminous matter – there must be much more matter than we can see in these galaxies to hold the stars in orbit. Ever since these discoveries, scientists have been trying to piece together the puzzle using sparse clues. A simulation of the formation of dark matter structures from the early universe until today. Ralf Kaehler/SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, American Museum of Natural History There is currently a wide range of dark matter candidates. We don’t even have a very good idea what the mass of dark matter particles might be, which makes it difficult to work out how best to search for them. Roman’s enormous surveys will provide a comprehensive look at the distribution of galaxies and galaxy clusters across the universe in the most detailed dark matter studies ever undertaken, thanks to dark matter’s gravitational effects. These surveys will yield new insight into the fundamental nature of dark matter, which will enable scientists to hone their searching techniques. Wrinkles in Space-time If dark matter is invisible, how do we know it exists? While dark matter doesn’t interact with normal matter in most cases, it does affect it gravitationally (which is how it was first discovered decades ago), so we can map its presence by looking at clusters of galaxies, the most massive structures in the universe. Light always travels in a straight line, but space-time – the fabric of the universe – is curved by concentrations of mass within it. So when light passes by a mass, its path curves as well: a straight line in a curved space. Light that would normally pass near a galaxy cluster instead bends toward and around it, producing intensified – and sometimes multiple – images of the background source. This process, called strong gravitational lensing, transforms galaxy clusters into colossal natural telescopes that give us a glimpse of distant cosmic objects that would normally be too faint to be visible. Since more matter leads to stronger lensing effects, gravitational lensing observations provide a way to determine the location and quantity of matter in galaxy clusters. Scientists have discovered that all of the visible matter we see in galaxy clusters isn’t nearly enough to create the observed warping effects. Dark matter provides the surplus gravity. Scientists have confirmed earlier observations by measuring how much matter in the very early universe is “normal” and how much is “dark” using experiments like NASA’s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) . Even though normal matter makes up everything we can see, the universe must contain more than five times as much dark matter to fit the observations. Entangled among the galaxies in this Hubble image are mysterious-looking arcs of blue light. These are actually distorted images of remote galaxies behind the cluster. The collective gravity of all the normal and dark matter trapped inside the cluster warps space-time and affects light traveling through the cluster toward Earth. NASA, ESA, and J. Lotz and the HFF Team (STScI) Roman will Shed Light on Dark Matter Roman will build on previous dark matter studies by using so-called weak gravitational lensing that tracks how smaller clumps of dark matter warp the apparent shapes of more distant galaxies. Observing lensing effects on this more refined scale will enable scientists to fill in more of the gaps in our understanding of dark matter. The mission will measure the locations and quantities of both normal matter and dark matter in hundreds of millions of galaxies. Throughout cosmic history, dark matter has driven how stars and galaxies formed and evolved. If dark matter consists of heavy, sluggish particles, it would clump together readily and Roman should see galaxy formation early in cosmic history. If dark matter is made up of lighter, faster-moving particles, it should take longer to settle into clumps and for large-scale structures to develop. Roman’s gravitational lensing studies will allow us to peer back in time to trace how galaxies and galaxy clusters formed under the influence of dark matter. If astronomers can narrow down the candidates for dark matter particles, we’ll be one step closer to finally detecting them directly in experiments on Earth. Related Stories Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Roman Mission Gears Up for a Torrent of Future Data Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Roman Space Telescope to Uncover Echoes of the Universe’s Creation 5 Min Read How NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Rewind the Universe Article 5 Min Read WFIRST Will Add Pieces to the Dark Matter Puzzle Article 5 Min Read NASA Telescope to Help Untangle Galaxy Growth, Dark Matter Makeup Article

Roman Exoplanets In little more than a generation, we’ve gone from knowing only of our own solar system to finding thousands of more distant worlds, known as exoplanets. As new exoplanet discoveries continue to pour in, scientists are building an ever-more-complete catalog of the worlds that grace our galaxy. Most of the exoplanets detected so far seem wild and exotic compared to the worlds in our solar system. Astronomers are eager to find habitable, Earth-like planets. But finding relatively small, dim bodies orbiting large, bright stars is tricky. Astronomers have used the transit detection method to find most of the known exoplanets, relying on serendipity to spot planets crossing in front of their stars. Roman will find around 100,000 planets using this technique, but it will primarily use a planet-hunting method called microlensing. Wrinkles in Space-time By spotting transits, astronomers have amassed an exciting but incomplete cache of worlds. This technique is best at finding planets larger than Neptune with orbits much smaller than Mercury’s. For a solar system like our own, transit studies could miss every planet. Microlensing is best suited to finding worlds from the habitable zone of their star and farther out. This includes ice giants, like Uranus and Neptune in our solar system, and even rogue planets — worlds freely roaming the galaxy unbound to any stars. Roman’s microlensing observations will help us find analogs to nearly every planet in our solar system. Microlensing events , occur when an object such as a star or planet comes into near-perfect alignment with an unrelated background star from our viewpoint. Because anything with mass warps the fabric of space-time , light from the distant star bends around the nearer object as it passes close by. The nearer object therefore acts as a natural magnifying glass, creating a temporary spike in the brightness of the background star’s light. That signal lets astronomers know there’s an intervening object, even if they can’t see it directly. So far, microlensing has only revealed about 2 percent of known exoplanets because the signals are so difficult to detect. Telescopes on the ground have to peer through Earth’s hazy atmosphere, which makes high-resolution microlensing observations difficult or impossible. The signals are so rare and short-lived, lasting between a few hours and a couple of days, that it’s even difficult for space-based telescopes to spot them. Roman will survey the crowded central region of our galaxy, using its wide, deep view to monitor the light from hundreds of millions of stars. The mission will likely set a new record for the farthest-known exoplanet, offering a glimpse of a different galactic neighborhood that could be home to worlds quite unlike those that are currently known. And finding worlds with a wide range of masses and orbital distances will help complete a census of the worlds that grace our galaxy. Direct Imaging Exoplanets are so dim and distant that they’re practically invisible, even to powerful telescopes. That’s why nearly all of the planets we’ve discovered so far have been found indirectly, thanks to the effect they have on their host star. However, relatively recent advancements in technology allow astronomers to take real images of exoplanets. Planets are billions of times dimmer than their host stars, so they’re usually lost in the glare. But by blocking the star’s light using a coronagraph or starshade, astronomers can image fainter planets in orbit. This technique works best for nearby planetary systems, whose planets will be especially bright. Roman will be equipped with a Coronagraph Instrument to demonstrate the technology photograph worlds and dusty disks around nearby stars with detail up to a thousand times better than possible with other observatories. While Roman is primarily an infrared telescope, it will be able to image worlds in visible light using the Coronagraph Instrument. Doing so from space will help astronomers see smaller, older, and colder planets than direct imaging usually reveals, bringing us a giant leap closer to imaging planets like Earth by photographing Jupiter analogs. Microlensing Direct Imaging Transit Method Microlensing Roman will monitor 200 million stars toward the center of our galaxy. Astronomers expect the survey to reveal more than a thousand planets in the habitable zone of their stars and farther out, thanks to the light-bending effects of massive objects. Read More Direct Imaging Roman will demonstrate direct imaging technology by observing worlds that are Jupiter’s size circling Sun-like stars, and imaging planets that are up to several billion years old – something that has never been done before. These results will pave the way for future missions to study worlds that are even more Earth-like. Read More Transit Method Since Roman will be tracking the amount of light coming from distant stars over time, astronomers expect it to also reveal as many as 100,000 transiting planets. These worlds dim the light of their host stars when they cross in front of them. Read More Transit Method Featured News More NASA News Article 6 Min Read Why NASA’s Roman Mission Will Study Milky Way’s Flickering Lights Article 6 Min Read New Study Reveals NASA’s Roman Could Find 400 Earth-Mass Rogue Planets 6 Min Read Assembly Begins on NASA’s Next Tool to Study Exoplanets Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Roman Mission Could Snap First Image of a Jupiter-Like World Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Roman Mission Predicted to Find 100,000 Transiting Planets Article MORE ON EXOPLANETS NASA Exoplanet Exploration Finding potential life-bearing worlds among the stars is NASA's next big challenge. Join the journey to search for planets beyond our solar system. Learn More

Explore This Section Other Stars, Other Worlds As we look around the galaxy, how different is our solar system from other systems in the Milky Way? How much are we alike? This five-part series looks at some of our intriguing galactic neighbors — these other worlds, and the stars that they orbit. A Real-life Tatooine? Learn about Kepler-16 b and the twin suns in its sky. Our Exotic Next-Door Neighbor Not one, not two, but three stars in this system. Planets=7 Habitability=? The TRAPPIST-1 star and its clutch of rocky planets — are any capable of life? Twins — But Far From Identical A Sun-like star surrounded by eight planets — just like us! But look again... A Stellar Dance Six stars, paired up, twirling around and between each other. Let's Explore 01 Kepler-16 b: (Almost) a Real-life Tatooine A moody scene from “Star Wars” – Luke Skywalker watching a double sunset on his home world of Tatooine – seemed to gain a real-life analog with the announcement of a stunning discovery in 2011 of a planet dubbed Kepler-16 b. Learn More An imagined view from a moon of the exoplanet Kepler-16 b. NASA/JPL-Caltech 02 Our Nearest Celestial Neighbor — An Exotic 3-Star System A journey of 4.25 light-years will bring you to our nearest neighboring star: Proxima Centauri, or Proxima Cen for short. At least one planet, and possibly two more, orbit the star, making the planet – or planets – the closest outside our solar system. Explore Shining brightly in this Hubble image is our closest stellar neighbor: Proxima Centauri. Proxima Centauri lies in the constellation of Centaurus (The Centaur), just over 4 light-years from Earth. Although it looks bright through the eye of Hubble, as you might expect from the nearest star to the solar system, Proxima Centauri is not visible to the naked eye. Its average luminosity is very low, and it is quite small compared to other stars, at only about an eighth of the mass of the Sun. 03 For Seven Earth-Sized Planets, a Question of Habitability They make up perhaps the most famous planetary system beyond our own: the TRAPPIST-1 star and its seven small, rocky worlds — lettered b through h — some 40 light-years away from Earth. Learn More This artist's concept shows what the TRAPPIST-1 planetary system may look like, based on available data about the planets' diameters, masses and distances from the host star. This image represents observations from NASA's Spitzer and Kepler space telescopes, in addition to the ground-based TRAPPIST (TRAnsiting Planets and PlanetesImals Small Telescope) telescope, and other ground-based observatories. The system was named for the TRAPPIST telescope. 04 A Near-Twin of Our Solar System? Let’s Take a Closer Look More than 2,500 light-years away from our Sun and its family of planets is a different family – a Sun-like star with a planetary entourage of eight. It’s the only system known so far with a planet count that matches our own. Explore Artist’s concept of the Kepler-90 system compared with our own solar system. NASA/Ames Research Center/Wendy Stenzel 05 Six Stars, One System Two-star systems are quite common in our galaxy. Even systems with three stars are not especially rare – our nearest stellar neighbor, Alpha Centauri, is just such a trio. But then there's TYC 7037-89-1, a system of six stars in a balletic interplay rivaling Tchaikovsky. Explore This schematic shows the configuration of the sextuple star system TYC 7037-89-1. The inner quadruple is composed of two binaries, A and C, which orbit each other every four years or so. An outer binary, B, orbits the quadruple roughly every 2,000 years. All three pairs are eclipsing binaries. The orbits shown are not to scale. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Galaxies Stars in an Exoplanet World Stars are the most basic building blocks of galaxies. The age, distribution, and composition of stars trace the history, dynamics,…

Explore This Section What is an Exoplanet? Contents A galaxy of stars – and planets Exoplanet discovery – and mystery Types of exoplanets So far scientists have categorized exoplanets into the following types: Gas giant, Neptunian, super-Earth, and terrestrial. The planets beyond our solar system are called “exoplanets,” and they come in a wide variety of sizes, from gas giants larger than Jupiter to small, rocky planets about as big around as Earth or Mars. They can be hot enough to boil metal or locked in deep freeze. They can orbit their stars so tightly that a “year” lasts only a few days; they can orbit two suns at once. Some exoplanets are even sunless rogues, wandering solo through the galaxy in permanent darkness. When we describe different types of exoplanets – planets outside our solar system – what do we mean by "hot Jupiters," "warm Neptunes," and "super-Earths"? Since we're still surveying and learning about the variety of worlds out there among the stars, it's sometimes helpful to refer to characteristics they share with planets we're familiar with in our own planetary system. NASA/JPL-Caltech A galaxy of stars – and planets Our galaxy, the Milky Way, is the thick stream of stars that cuts across the sky on the darkest, clearest nights. Its spiraling expanse contains at least 100 billion stars, our Sun among them. And if each of those stars has not just one planet, but, like ours, a whole system of them, then the number of planets in the galaxy is truly astronomical: We’re already heading into the trillions. We humans have been speculating about such possibilities for thousands of years, but ours is the first generation to know, with certainty, that exoplanets are really out there. In fact, way out there. Our nearest neighboring star, Proxima Centauri, was found to possess at least one planet – probably a rocky one. It’s about 4 light-years away – more than 25 trillion miles (40 trillion kilometers). The bulk of exoplanets found so far are hundreds or thousands of light-years away. The bad news: As yet we have no way to reach them, and won’t be leaving footprints on them anytime soon. The good news: We can look in on them, take their temperatures, taste their atmospheres and, perhaps one day soon, detect signs of life that might be hidden in pixels of light captured from these dim, distant worlds. Exoplanet discovery – and mystery The first exoplanets were discovered in the early 1990s, but the first exoplanet to burst upon the world stage was 51 Pegasi b , a “hot Jupiter” orbiting a Sun-like star 50 light-years away. The watershed year was 1995. Since then we’ve discovered thousands more. Size and mass play a crucial role in determining planet types. There are also varieties within the size/mass classifications. Scientists also have noted what seems to be a strange gap in planet sizes. It’s been dubbed the “radius valley,” or the Fulton gap, after Benjamin Fulton, lead author on a paper describing it. Data from NASA’s Kepler spacecraft showed that planets of a certain size-range are rare – those between 1.5 and 2 times the size (diameter) of Earth, which would place them among the super-Earths. It’s possible that this represents a critical size in planet formation: Planets that reach this size quickly attract thick atmospheres of hydrogen and helium gas, and balloon up into gaseous planets, while planets smaller than this limit are not large enough to hold such an atmosphere and remain primarily rocky, terrestrial bodies. On the other hand, the smaller planets that orbit close to their stars could be the cores of Neptune-like worlds that had their atmospheres stripped away. Explaining the Fulton gap will require a far better understanding of how planetary systems form. Variety is a major theme in exoplanet discoveries over the past quarter century, as shown in this illustration. Most have been discovered by the "transit" method – watching for the tiniest of shadows as a planet crosses the face of its star. NASA/JPL-Caltech Types of exoplanets Each planet type varies in interior and exterior appearance depending on composition. Gas giants are planets the size of Saturn or Jupiter, the largest planet in our solar system, or much, much larger. More variety is hidden within these broad categories. Hot Jupiters, for instance, were among the first planet types found – gas giants orbiting so closely to their stars that their temperatures soar into the thousands of degrees (Fahrenheit or Celsius). Neptunian planets are similar in size to Neptune or Uranus in our solar system. They likely have a mixture of interior compositions, but all will have hydrogen and helium-dominated outer atmospheres and rocky cores. We’re also discovering mini-Neptunes, planets smaller than Neptune and bigger than Earth. No planets of this size or type exist in our solar system. Super-Earths are typically terrestrial planets that may or may not have atmospheres. They are more massive than Earth, but lighter than Neptune. Terrestrial planets are Earth sized and smaller, composed of rock, silicate, water or carbon. Further investigation will determine whether some of them possess atmospheres, oceans or other signs of habitability. Explore the Planet Types Gas Giant Like Jupiter and Saturn, but often much larger and closer to their stars, these exoplanets have swirling gases above a solid core, instead of a hard outer surface. Neptune-like Similar in size to Neptune or Uranus, these exoplanets typically have hydrogen- and helium-dominated atmospheres around rocky, heavy-metal cores. Super-Earth Unlike anything in our solar system, these are 2 to 10 times the mass of Earth, but smaller than Neptune, and can be made of gas, rock or a combination of both. Terrestrial A rocky world — like Earth, Mars, Venus, and Mercury — but outside our solar system. Discovery Alert: Exoplanet Candidate HD 137010 b Research by volunteers led to the discovery of a possible cool, rocky exoplanet, slightly larger than Earth Exoplanet candidate HD 137010 b was discovered orbiting a Sun-like star 146 light-years away. An international team of professional and amateur astronomers published “A Cool Earth-sized Planet Candidate Transiting a Tenth Magnitude K-dwarf From K2” in The Astrophysical Journal Letters on Jan. 27, 2026. The paper’s authors include several volunteers from NASA’s Planet Hunters citizen science project — Hans Martin Schwengeler, Martti H. Kristiansen, Mark Omohundro, and Ivan A. Terentev, as well as lead author Alexander Venner, who participated in this citizen science project before he completed his Ph.D. NASA's citizen science projects are collaborations between scientists and interested members of the public. Through these collaborations, volunteers (known as citizen scientists) have helped make thousands of important scientific discoveries. Learn how to get involved with NASA Citizen Science . Read the Article: ‘Discovery Alert: An Ice-Cold Earth?’ Artist's concept of exoplanet candidate HD 137010 b, dubbed an "ice-cold Earth" because it's a possible rocky planet slightly larger than Earth, orbiting a Sun-like star about 146 light-years away. NASA/JPL-Caltech/Keith Miller (Caltech/IPAC) Next: Learn More About the Building Blocks of Galaxies — Stars! Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore This Section In Depth: Exoplanets Contents How Do We Find Exoplanets? NASA’s Exoplanet Space Telescopes Confirmed vs. Candidate How Do We Name Exoplanets? Explore TRAPPIST-1 An exoplanet, or extrasolar planet, is a planet outside of our solar system that usually orbits another star in our galaxy. Exoplanets – planets outside our solar system – are everywhere. But why do we study them? What makes them so interesting? At NASA, we're surveying and studying exoplanets to learn all about their weirdness, their variety, and all the fascinating things they can tell us about how planets form and develop. NASA/JPL-Caltech Most of the exoplanets discovered so far are in a relatively small region of our galaxy, the Milky Way. ("Small" meaning within thousands of light-years of our solar system; one light-year equals 5.88 trillion miles, or 9.46 trillion kilometers.) That is as far as current telescopes have been able to probe. We know from NASA’s Kepler Space Telescope that there are more planets than stars in the galaxy. Although exoplanets are distant — even the closest known exoplanet to Earth, Proxima Centauri b , is still about 4 light-years away — scientists have discovered creative ways to spot these seemingly tiny objects. Unable to render the provided source At only four light-years away, Proxima b is our closest known exoplanet neighbor. How Do We Find Exoplanets? There are five methods scientists commonly use to discover exoplanets. The two main techniques are the transit and radial velocity methods. When a planet passes directly between an observer and the star it orbits, it blocks some of that starlight. For a brief period of time, that star’s light actually gets dimmer. It's a tiny change, but it's enough to clue astronomers in to the presence of an exoplanet around a distant star. This is known as the transit method. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video When an exoplanet transits a star — it passes directly between the star and an observer — the exoplanet dims the star's light by a measurable amount. NASA Orbiting planets cause stars to wobble in space, changing the color of light astronomers see when observing a star. Stars are affected by the gravitational tug of their orbiting planets and, when observed through a telescope, this affects the star's light spectrum. If the star moves in the direction of the observer it will appear to be shifted toward blue. If it is moving away from the observer, it will shift toward the red. Observing this is known as the radial velocity method. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Orbiting planets cause stars to wobble in space, changing the color of the light astronomers observe. NASA NASA’s Exoplanet Space Telescopes Thousands of exoplanets have been discovered and confirmed orbiting other stars. The first evidence of exoplanets dates to 1917 when Adriaan van Maanen identified the first "polluted" white dwarf , although the significance of the find was not recognized until 2014. The first confirmed detection of an exoplanet would not come until the 1990s. Then exoplanet discoveries grew exponentially in the years to follow, with the launch of the Kepler Space Telescope . The Kepler mission was specifically designed to survey our region of the Milky Way galaxy to discover hundreds of Earth-size and smaller planets in or near the habitable zone (also called the “Goldilocks zone,” the area around a star where rocky planets could have liquid water on the surface — not too hot, and not too cold) and determine the fraction of stars that might have such planets around them. After the second of Kepler’s four gyroscope-like wheels failed in 2013, Kepler completed its prime mission that November and began its extended mission, K2. The spacecraft was retired in 2018, but Kepler data are still being used to find exoplanets (more than 2,700 confirmed so far). NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (2013-2020) was not designed to search for exoplanets, but its infrared instruments made it an excellent exoplanet explorer. It was used in the notable discovery of the TRAPPIST-1 system, where an unprecedented seven planets were determined to be in the star's habitable zone. In 2018 the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) was launched as a successor to Kepler to discover exoplanets in orbit around the brightest dwarf stars, the most common star type in our galaxy. NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope and the future Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope hold great promise for what we can learn from exoplanets. Through spectroscopy, the reading of light signatures for information, astronomers hope to learn more about planet atmospheres and the conditions of the planets themselves. The Milky Way, our own galaxy, stretches across the sky above the La Silla Observatory in Chile. Hidden inside our own galaxy are trillions of planets, most waiting to be found. ESO/S. Brunier Confirmed vs. Candidate An exoplanet candidate is a likely planet discovered by a telescope but has not yet been proven to actually exist. It is possible for some candidates to turn out to be "false positives." A planet is considered "confirmed" once it is verified through additional observation using two other telescopes. There are currently thousands of planet candidates awaiting confirmation. But time on telescopes is considered a precious resource and it takes a lot of computing time to find which targets to investigate. This is one area where amateur scientists can work with NASA data to help refine targets and even discover exoplanets. Where computers might miss a single transit, humans can detect small brightness dips in data that might tell us there is a planet to be found. How Do We Name Exoplanets? Exoplanet names can look long and complicated at first, especially when compared to names like Venus and Mars. However, there is a logic behind their naming system that is important to how scientists catalog thousands of planets. Astronomers differentiate between the alphanumeric "designations" and alphabetical "proper names." All stars and exoplanets have designations, but very few have proper names. The first part of an exoplanet name is usually the telescope or survey that discovered it. The number is the order in which the star was cataloged by position. The lowercase letter stands for the planet, in the order in which the planet was found. The first planet found is always named b, with ensuing planets named c, d, e, f and so on. The star that the exoplanet orbits is usually the undeclared "A" of the system, which can be useful if the system contains many stars, which themselves may be designated B or C. (Stars get capital letters; planets receive lowercase designations.) If a bunch of exoplanets around the same star are found at once, the planet closest to its star is named b with more distant planets named c, d, e and so on. An example of an exoplanet name is Kepler-16 b, where "Kepler" is the name of the telescope that observed the system, 16 is the order in which the star was cataloged and "b" is the closest planet to the star. If we were naming Earth as an exoplanet, it would be called Sun d (Sun is the name of our star, and starting with Mercury as "b," Earth is the third planet, so "d"). Next: An overview of exoplanet types Explore TRAPPIST-1 This system of seven rocky worlds — all of them with the potential for water on their surface — is an exciting discovery in the search for life on other worlds. Learn More About the TRAPPIST-1 System More to Explore 10 Things: All About TRAPPIST-1 Read More Planet Hop from TRAPPIST-1e Read More TRAPPIST-1 is Older Than Our Solar System Read More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore This Section Exoplanet Citizen Science NASA’s citizen science projects welcome members of the public to work with NASA data. Collaborating with NASA scientists, volunteers known as citizen scientists have helped make thousands of important discoveries. Learn how you too can help NASA researchers search for and study worlds beyond our solar system. Exoplanet Watch Observe transiting exoplanets with small telescopes. You do not need to own your own telescope in order to participate. Learn More About Exoplanet Watch Attendees look through telescopes on the South Lawn of the White House during the second White House Astronomy Night on Monday, Oct. 19, 2015. NASA/Joel Kowsky Exoplanet Explorers Discover new planets orbiting other stars in our galaxy. Learn More About Exoplanet Explorers The Kepler Space Telescope NASA Planet Hunters TESS Search for undiscovered worlds using data from NASA’s TESS mission. Learn More About Planet Hunters TESS NASA/Ames/Wendy Stenzel Backyard Worlds Search the realm beyond Neptune for new brown dwarfs and planets. Learn More About Backyard Worlds Illustration of an ultracool brown dwarf with a companion white dwarf. Citizen scientist Frank Kiwy, participant in the Backyard Worlds: Planet 9 project, discovered 34 new ultracool dwarf binary systems in the Sun's neighborhood. NOIRLab/NSF/AURA/M. Garlick Planet Patrol Help find out which planet candidates from the TESS mission are real. Learn More About Planet Patrol TESS will look at the nearest, brightest stars to find planetary candidates that scientists will observe for years to come. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Disk Detective Spot the disks around nearby stars where planets form and dwell. Learn More About Disk Detective This rendering of a disk around an M-dwarf star, created by citizen scientist Jonathan Holden, illustrates a finding from the Disk Detective project. NASA/Jonathan Holden UNITE: Unistellar Network Investigating TESS Exoplanets NASA’s TESS mission has identified many new exoplanets, and now astronomers need help to characterize their orbits, as a first step in learning about them. The worldwide Unistellar network of amateur and professional astronomers is documenting the timing of exoplanets' transits, to better describe their orbits. Learn More About UNITE An artist’s interpretation of a gas giant in its planetary system. NASA/JPL NASA Citizen Science NASA offers a range of citizen science projects; some can be done by anyone, anywhere, with just a cellphone or laptop. Check out all the ways you can work on NASA science. Learn More About NASA Citizen Science A new SciGirls TV special called “Dakota Stars” features NASA’s Disk Detective citizen science project. NASA Citizen Science in Action: Exoplanet Candidate HD 137010 b Research by volunteers led to the discovery of a possible cool, rocky exoplanet, slightly larger than Earth Exoplanet candidate HD 137010 b was discovered orbiting a Sun-like star 146 light-years away. An international team of professional and amateur astronomers published “A Cool Earth-sized Planet Candidate Transiting a Tenth Magnitude K-dwarf From K2” in The Astrophysical Journal Letters on Jan. 27, 2026. The paper’s authors include several volunteers from NASA’s Planet Hunters citizen science project — Hans Martin Schwengeler, Martti H. Kristiansen, Mark Omohundro, and Ivan A. Terentev, as well as lead author Alexander Venner, who participated in this citizen science project before he completed his Ph.D. NASA's citizen science projects are collaborations between scientists and interested members of the public. Through these collaborations, volunteers (known as citizen scientists) have helped make thousands of important scientific discoveries. Learn how to get involved with NASA Citizen Science . Read the Article: ‘Discovery Alert: An Ice-Cold Earth?’ Artist's concept of exoplanet candidate HD 137010 b, dubbed an "ice-cold Earth" because it's a possible rocky planet slightly larger than Earth, orbiting a Sun-like star about 146 light-years away. NASA/JPL-Caltech/Keith Miller (Caltech/IPAC) open science Citizens Fueling Exoplanet Research Exoplanet research has a long involvement with citizen science. Volunteers from the public help professional researchers sift through data collected by the Kepler and TESS space telescopes — among other things helping scientists refine the best time to observe important targets. The flood of data and need for citizen assistance is expected to grow even more, with the launch of future missions, including the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope and Habitable Worlds Observatory. Read 'How NASA Citizen Science Fuels Future Exoplanet Research' K2-33b, shown in this illustration, is one of the youngest exoplanets detected to date using NASA's Kepler Space Telescope. NASA Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Exoplanets TESS (Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite) NASA’s TESS discovers exoplanets, worlds beyond our solar system. In the course of its extended observations of the sky, TESS… Exoplanet Stories Skywatching

Explore This Section Strange New Worlds The first planets beyond our solar system, exoplanets, were discovered in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Since then, we've confirmed more than 6,000, and know there are many, many more. Here are some of our favorites. Explore intriguing worlds in our galaxy Kepler-16 b — one planet, two stars Discovered 2011: Kepler-16 b is a world where two suns set over the horizon instead of just one, the first Tatooine-like planet found in our galaxy. View Kepler-16 b Kepler-22 b — Possible water world Discovered 2011: A possible ocean world orbiting in the habitable zone—the region around a star where the temperature is right for liquid water, a requirement for life on Earth. View Kepler-22 b Kepler-7 b — First to be cloud-mapped Discovered 2009: A massive world called a hot Jupiter, Kepler-7b was the first exoplanet to have its clouds mapped. View Kepler-7 b Kepler-452 b — Earth's older cousin Discovered 2015: An "Earth-cousin" that orbits a star like our sun in the habitable zone, where liquid water could exist. View Kepler-452 b KELT-9 b — Hotter than most stars Discovered 2017: KELT-9 b is so hot that the heat tears molecules apart on the dayside. View KELT-9 b WASP-12 b — Being eaten by parent star Discovered 2008: The doomed planet WASP-12b is a hot Jupiter that orbits so close to its parent star, it's being torn apart. It takes this alien world only 1.1 days to completely circle its Sun. View WASP-12 b 55 Cancri e — Lava ocean, sparkling skies Discovered 2004: This super hot world is covered in a global ocean of lava and has sparkling skies. View 55 Cancri e TYC 8998-760-1 b — What are you seeing? Discovered 2020: This object, a brown dwarf or perhaps a large planet, joins an exclusive club — those that have been directly imaged. View TYC 8998-760-1 b GJ 15 A b — Super-heated Super-Earth Discovered 2014: GJ 15 A b orbits a red-dwarf star just 11 light-years away with its companion GJ 15 A c, making them our nearest multi-planet neighbors discovered so far. View GJ 15 A b GJ 15 A c - Only 11 light-years away Discovered 2018: Nearby GJ 15 A c orbits a red-dwarf star just 11 light-years away with its companion, making them our nearest multi-planet neighbors discovered so far. View GJ 15 A c Kepler-36 b — Bizarrely close neighbors Discovered 2012: Kepler-36b and its companion planet, Kepler-36c, are far too close to their sun to be in the habitable zone, and they are bizarrely close to each other. View Kepler-36 b GJ 504 b — Magnificently magenta If we could travel to this giant planet, we would see a world still glowing from the heat of its formation with a color reminiscent of a dark cherry blossom, a dull magenta. View GJ 504 b GJ 436 b — Mysteriously missing methane Discovered 2004: A close exoplanet with a secret: a lack of methane on this hot world. GJ 436 b is a Neptune-sized exoplanet that orbits an M-type star. Its mass is 22.1 Earths. View GJ 436 b TOI-849 b — Atmosphere destroyed by star Discovered 2020: A world called TOI 849 b could be the exposed, naked core of a gas giant whose atmosphere was blasted away by its star. View TOI-849 b AU Microscopii b — Infant solar system Discovered 2020: Located less than 32 light-years from Earth, AU Microscopii is among the youngest planetary systems ever observed by astronomers, and its star throws vicious temper tantrums! View AU Microscopii b PSR B1257+12 b — Doomed world Discovered 1994: PSR B1257+12 b, along with fellow doomed worlds, were among the first and creepiest to be discovered as they orbit an undead star known as a pulsar. Pulsar planets like Poltergeist and its neighboring worlds, Phobetor and Draugr, are consumed with constant radiation from the star’s core. View PSR B1257+12 b HD 189733 b — Rains glass Discovered 2005: This far-off blue planet may look like a friendly haven – but don’t be deceived! Weather here is deadly. The planet’s cobalt blue color comes from a hazy, blow-torched atmosphere containing clouds laced with glass. Howling winds send the storming glass sideways at 5,400 mph (2km/s), whipping all in a sickening spiral. It’s death by a million cuts on this slasher planet! View HD 189733 b KOI-55 b — Hotter than the Sun Discovered 2011: Kepler-70 b (aka KOI-55 b) could well be another circle of hell with an average temperature hotter than the Sun’s surface. It used to be Jupiter-sized until it spent some time inside its now-dead star…a trip that destroys most planets, but left this one a Freddy Krueger-like burned world smaller than Earth. About 12,000 degrees F (6,800 C), it is one of the hottest planets discovered. In fact, the planet itself is evaporating, soon to be another victim. View KOI-55 b HD 17156 b — AKA Mulchatna Discovered 2007: A giant planet composed mostly of gas. Also given the name Mulchatna, for a river in Alaska that supports indigenous and native populations. View HD 17156 b GJ 1132 b — On its second atmosphere Discovered 2015: GJ 1132 b may have begun as a mini-Neptune, but is now a rocky world a little bigger than Earth. The planet may have lost one atmosphere but gained another from volcanic activity. View GJ 1132 b TIC 172900988 b — Rare double transit discovery Discovered 2021: This planet about as big around as Jupiter belongs to a system that’s a stunner. The planet orbits two stars and, viewed from Earth, crosses the faces of both. That means this system puts on quite a show! View TIC 172900988 b WASP-96 b — Hot and puffy with a signature of water Discovered 2014: An international team found that WASP-96 b is a world with a sodium rich atmosphere. The planet, located nearly 1,150 light-years from Earth, orbits its star every 3.4 days. It has about half the mass of Jupiter, and its discovery was announced in 2014. View WASP-96 b TOI-3757 b — Marshmallow planet Discovered 2022: A gas giant exoplanet with the density of a marshmallow has been detected in orbit around a cool red dwarf. TOI-3757 b, is the lowest-density planet ever detected around a red dwarf star (2022). View TOI-3757 b TrES-2 b — Eternal night Are you afraid of the dark? Welcome to TrEs-2b, the planet of eternal night. The darkest planet ever discovered orbiting a star, this alien world is less reflective than coal. Inside its atmosphere, you’d be flying blind in the dark. Some scientists think an eerie deep red glow would emanate from its burning atmosphere. View TrES-2 b Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore This Section Target Star Catalog As we search for Earth-like exoplanets, this guide lists stars for astronomers to target for future scrutiny — candidates that might be suns shining on their own habitable worlds. This catalog contains some of the most promising stars to explore with a mission such as the Habitable Worlds Observatory . Recommended by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine as NASA's next large space telescope, after the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope in 2027, the Habitable Worlds Observatory will be the first observatory built specifically to search for and directly observe Earth-like exoplanets, and study them for signs of life. As planned, HWO will be able to peer into the habitable zones of nearby stars — the zone in which temperatures allow liquid water to exist on a planet's surface, also known as the “Goldilocks zone.” The stars on this list qualify as “just right” for a mission like that to target — they have habitable zones far enough from the star so the telescope can get a clear view of any planets, and any Earth-sized exoplanet located there would be bright enough to allow spectral analysis of its atmosphere. This target list is expected to evolve as astronomers continue studying these stars, and can help inform the development of a future target list for the Habitable Worlds Observatory as planning for the mission progresses. For each star listed below, the image (artist's concept) links to an interactive 3D representation of the star. When you get to that detail page, learn more about the star's exploration history and appearances in pop culture by pressing the Learn More button next to the star's name. Filters Sort: Light-Years From Earth Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Light-Years From Earth Visual Magnitude Planet Count Order: Ascending Ascending Descending Toliman Light-Years From Earth: 4.3 Visual Magnitude: 1.4 Planet Count: Unknown Rigil Kentaurus Light-Years From Earth: 4.3 Visual Magnitude: 0 Planet Count: Unknown GJ 411 Light-Years From Earth: 8.3 Visual Magnitude: 7.4 Planet Count: Unknown Epsilon Eridani Light-Years From Earth: 10.5 Visual Magnitude: 3.7 Planet Count: Unknown GJ 887 Light-Years From Earth: 10.7 Visual Magnitude: 7.3 Planet Count: Unknown 61 Cygni A Light-Years From Earth: 11.4 Visual Magnitude: 5.2 Planet Count: Unknown 61 Cygni B Light-Years From Earth: 11.4 Visual Magnitude: 6 Planet Count: Unknown Epsilon Indi A Light-Years From Earth: 11.9 Visual Magnitude: 4.7 Planet Count: Unknown Tau Ceti Light-Years From Earth: 11.9 Visual Magnitude: 3.5 Planet Count: Unknown key to star types (artist concepts) Yellow-White F-type stars are yellow-white, and are somewhat hotter, more massive, and more luminous than our Sun. Yellow Type G stars — like our Sun — provide a wider habitable zone than some other types, but are relatively uncommon. Only about 6% of the stars in the Milky Way fall into this category. Orange Dwarf K-type, or orange dwarf stars are smaller and cooler than G-type stars like our Sun, but are three times more plentiful in the Milky Way, and can burn steadily for tens of billions of years. That gives any exoplanets more time to evolve life. Red Dwarf M-type stars, or red dwarfs, are abundant and long-lived, but also small, cool, and too faint to see with the unaided eye. These have a comparatively narrow habitable zone, very close to the star. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA The Habitable Zone Search for Life NASA Exoplanet Science Institute (NExScI) Habitable Worlds Observatory

Explore This Section 30 Years of Exoplanets The night sky has always been full of stars (so many stars!), for humans to look up and see. Sometimes we wondered: Were any of them like our Sun, with other worlds spinning around them? In 1995, after decades of searching (and millennia of wondering), astronomers confirmed the first planet orbiting a Sun-like star. That discovery, 51 Pegasi b, was stranger than anything in our solar system — a huge planet, about half the size of Jupiter, orbiting faster and closer to its star than Mercury is to the Sun. But a door to new worlds had opened. Scientists found a dozen more in the next three years, and about 175 in the first 10 years after that 1995 breakthrough. After 20 years, nearly 2,000. Today we've confirmed more than 6,000 worlds outside our solar system, and the pace of discovery continues growing faster. 51 pegasi b ‘It Was Exhilarating... Science History Was Happening Before Our Eyes’ October 1995 – A European team announced they had discovered a planet orbiting a distant star; the science community mostly dismissed it as yet another false detection. Then a week later a duo at California’s Lick Observatory confirmed the discovery – they could scarcely believe it themselves, but they spent four nights tracking 51 Pegasi b, the first exoplanet detected orbiting a Sun-like star. Read the story of these planet-hunting pioneers, who went on to find 70 of the first 100 exoplanets ever discovered. Read ‘Exoplanets 20/20: Looking Back to the Future’ Artist's concept of 51 Pegasi b, which was discovered in October 1995. About 50 light-years from Earth, the giant planet is around half the size of Jupiter, and whirls around its star in an orbit that lasts only 4.2 days. NASA/JPL-Caltech 51 Peg is much closer to its star than Earth is to the Sun, so it's super hot. Its "year," the time it takes to orbit its star, is four Earth days. counting our cosmic neighbors NASA Confirms 6,000 Exoplanets The oﬃcial number of exoplanets — planets outside our solar system — confirmed by NASA reached 6,000 in September 2025. The first exoplanet around a Sun-like star was discovered only 30 years earlier, in October 1995. Since then, the number has rapidly increased as technologies improve. Thousands more candidate planets await confirmation, and each confirmed planet enables scientists to learn more about the conditions under which planets can form, how common planets like Earth might be, and where to look for them. ‘We Are Seekers’ — Watch the Video otherworldly Encyclopedia Exoplanet Catalog Learn more about every confirmed exoplanet — more than 6,000 and counting — in this continuously updated resource. View interactive 3D models, read descriptions and vital statistics, and filter by exoplanet type, or by the method used to discover it, or by the spacecraft, observatory, or other facility that found it. Browse the Exoplanet Catalog Screenshot of the Eyes on Exoplanets interactive showing an orange gas giant planet KELT-4 A b. NASA a lot of nitty gritty to be picky about Scope it Out: How an Idea Becomes a Telescope Have you ever wondered how we get all those incredible images from deep space? Well, every super success began from just a tiny idea. You gotta scope it out! Watch the Video and Learn More Featured Video Watch — and Listen — to Exoplanet Discoveries On March 21, 2022, the number of known exoplanets passed 5,000, according to the NASA Exoplanet Archive. Starting in 1995, it took exoplanet hunters about 18 years to discover and confirm the first 1,000 exoplanets known to science; by comparison, increasing the total from 5,000 to today's 6,000-plus has taken less than four years. This 360-degree animation and sonification tracks humanity's discovery of the planets beyond our solar system over time. Turning NASA data into sounds allows users to hear the pace of discovery with additional information conveyed by the notes themselves. Experience '5,000 Exoplanets: Listen to the Sounds of Discovery (360 Video)' Target Star catalog The Hunt for Habitable Worlds The Target Star Catalog is a guide to intriguing nearby stars that astronomers want to study with future missions, such as the Habitable Worlds Observatory, which will be built specifically to find and observe Earth-like exoplanets, to search for signs of life. Browse the Target Star Catalog An artist's rendering of a red dwarf or M star, with three exoplanets orbiting. About 75 percent of all stars in the sky are the cooler, smaller red dwarfs. NASA/JPL-Caltech Learn More Habitable Worlds Observatory A future large infrared/optical/ultraviolet space telescope that would be the first telescope designed specifically to search for signs of life on planets orbiting other stars. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Kepler / K2 The Kepler space telescope was NASA’s first planet-hunting mission, assigned to search a portion of the Milky Way galaxy for… TESS (Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite) NASA’s TESS discovers exoplanets, worlds beyond our solar system. In the course of its extended observations of the sky, TESS… Exoplanets

Exoplanets A selection of artist's concept images of other worlds — those beyond our solar system — just a portion of the nearly 6,000 exoplanets confirmed so far. K2-33b, shown in this illustration, is one of the youngest exoplanets detected to date using NASA Kepler Space Telescope. It... This image shows an artist’s impression of the ten hot Jupiter exoplanets. From top left to to lower left these... This artist's illustration shows a gas giant planet circling a pair of red dwarf stars in the system OGLE-2007-BLG-349, located... A comparison of Earth and Kepler-1649c, an exoplanet only 1.06 times Earth's radius. Labeled Art Credit: NASA/Ames Research Center/Daniel Rutter Astronomers using data from NASA Kepler mission and ground-based telescopes recently discovered the three smallest exoplanets known to circle another... This artist's rendering shows a giant exoplanet causing small bodies to collide in a disk of dust. A study in... This illustration shows three possible interiors of the seven rocky exoplanets in the TRAPPIST-1 system, based on precision measurements of... This illustration shows a red dwarf star orbited by a hypothetical exoplanet. Red dwarfs tend to be magnetically active, displaying... WASP-18b is an exoplanet located 325 light-years from Earth. The planet's mass is 10 times that of Jupiter, and it... Release Date April 1, 2009 This is an artistic illustration of the giant planet HR 8799b. The planet was first... This still from a video shows illustrations of the seven Earth-size planets of TRAPPIST-1, an exoplanet system about 40 light-years... This artist's concept shows exoplanet Kepler-1649c orbiting around its host red dwarf star. This exoplanet is in its star's habitable... Caption: Glowing a dark magenta, the newly discovered exoplanet GJ 504b weighs in with about four times Jupiter's mass, making... “We like to say that Archean Earth is the most alien planet we have geochemical data for,” For astronomers trying... TOI 700, a planetary system 100 light-years away in the constellation Dorado, is home to TOI 700 d, the first... The super-Earth exoplanet 55 Cancri e, depicted with its star in this artist's concept, likely has an atmosphere thicker than... An illustration of Kepler-1649c orbiting around its host red dwarf star. This newly discovered exoplanet is in its star’s habitable...

Explore This Section Exoplanet Stories Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Newfound ‘Baby’ Planet Smashes Record for Youngest Known World 5 min read Astronomers have confirmed a world that’s less than a million years old as the youngest known planet, using data from NASA-funded archives. Called Elias 2-24 b, the baby planet is still whirling in its natal disk of dust and gas.… Sep 16, 2026 Article 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 1 min read NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is set to launch at 7:26 a.m. EDT on Sunday, Aug. 30. While you wait to watch the launch, brush up on some key facts about this wide-view mission. To learn more about the… Aug 27, 2026 Article NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars 5 min read Pandora, NASA’s newest exoplanet mission and the first satellite to launch through the agency’s Astrophysics Pioneers program, is now making unique observations of worlds beyond our solar system and the stars they orbit. The mission will determine the atmospheric make-up… Aug 25, 2026 Article NASA’s PUNCH Sharpens Solar Storm Forecasting in First Test 4 min read Using continuous imagery from NASA’s PUNCH (Polarimeter to Unify the Corona and Heliosphere) mission, scientists predicted the near-Earth arrival of a solar eruption to within 30 minutes in an initial proof of concept test. The results, presented Tuesday at the… Aug 4, 2026 Article NASA’s Webb Discovers Hidden Planet in Famous Star System 6 min read Astronomers using NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope have discovered a giant planet outside our solar system, called an exoplanet, hiding within one of the most intensely studied planetary systems in our Milky Way galaxy. The young, nearby star Beta Pictoris… Jul 15, 2026 Article NASA’s Webb Studies How Planet Survived Death of its Star 6 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope is giving us new insight into the far-future of solar systems like our own, as the agency continues to reveal the secrets of the universe and our place in it. Billions of years ago, a… Jul 1, 2026 Article NASA’s TESS Mission Finds Planetary System in New Way 5 min read For the first time, NASA’s TESS (Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite) mission has identified a planet orbiting a distant star thanks to ripples in space-time. Unlike the star-hugging transiting planets TESS regularly reveals, the newfound world is a super-Jupiter orbiting far… Jul 1, 2026 Article NASA’s TESS Mission Reveals the “Puffiest” Planets Ever Found 3 min read NASA has revealed two new “super-puff” planets, giant worlds so light that their density is comparable to cotton candy. Scientists calculate that these Jupiter-sized planets are the “puffiest” worlds ever found. Jun 24, 2026 Article Euclid View of Milky Way Heart Previews Core Survey by NASA’s Roman 6 min read A new look at the heart of our Milky Way galaxy by Euclid, an ESA (European Space Agency) mission with NASA contributions, overlaps with a region scientists will observe with NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, launching later this summer.… Jun 24, 2026 Article NASA’s Webb Catches Exoplanet Getting Roasted 4 min read That’s the latest from researchers analyzing NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s observations of HD 80606 b, an exoplanet four times the mass of Jupiter with an extremely elliptical orbit that sweeps close by its Sun-like star. Jun 16, 2026 Article

5 Min Read Newfound ‘Baby’ Planet Smashes Record for Youngest Known World An artist's concept of the youngest known exoplanet, Elias 2-24 b. Credits: W. M. Keck Observatory/Adam Makarenko Ashley Balzer Sep 16, 2026 Article Contents Construction zone Connecting dots Astronomers have confirmed a world that’s less than a million years old as the youngest known planet, using data from NASA-funded archives. Called Elias 2-24 b, the baby planet is still whirling in its natal disk of dust and gas. “Our planet-formation models already struggled to explain the previous record holders for the youngest known planet — a four-way tie between two planets orbiting the star PDS 70 and two planets orbiting the star WISPIT 2 — which are all more than 5 million years old,” said Lucas Cieza, a professor at the Instituto de Estudios Astrofísicos in Chile and co-author of a paper detailing the results. “Elias 2-24 b shows us that even our best planet-formation models are still missing some important processes.” In a study published Wednesday in The Astrophysical Journal Letters, a team led by Andrea Bernardi, a doctoral candidate at the Universidad Diego Portales in Chile, homed in on archival observations of seven stars that were observed using the coronagraph at the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii, which partners with NASA under a cooperative agreement. Each of these stars hosts a debris disk chock-full of dust, gas, and chunks of ice and rock with structures and gaps in the disk hinting that planets may be forming around them. Artist’s concept depicting Elias 2-24 b, the youngest exoplanet detected to date, still growing within the disk of gas and dust surrounding its young host star. Material from the disk is actively accreting onto the Jupiter-mass planet, which sits within a prominent gap in the disk, supporting the leading theory of giant planet formation. W. M. Keck Observatory/Adam Makarenko With the coronagraph blocking light from the host stars, astronomers searched for fainter planets orbiting those stars that could be embedded in the dusty disks. Planets found outside our own solar system are called exoplanets. “The planets should be found within the gaps, since they are carving them,” Bernardi said. “And that’s exactly where we found Elias 2-24 b.” The planet orbiting the star Elias 2-24 is about as massive as Jupiter and the star is about 450 light-years from Earth. Studying this system offers a time machine of sorts for scientists to explore what our own planetary system may have been like billions of years ago. Construction zone Stars are born in swirling clouds of gas and dust, swaddled in haze. Orbiting planets form from leftover material that clumps up and gradually sculpts a path around the star. But it’s difficult to study an exoplanet’s newborn stage because of all the dust that shrouds them. Most of the exoplanets we’ve discovered so far have been found using transits, which happen when a planet passes in front of its star and temporarily dims the amount of light we receive. Those transits are hard to spot when the planets are still deeply buried in dust or orbiting far from the star. That’s why an overwhelming majority of the 6,000 currently confirmed exoplanets are billions of years old and very close to their stars. Current planet-formation models rely on a combination of complex theories and simulations, along with observations of young stars with disks where the presence of planets cannot yet be detected. Finding and studying more baby planets like Elias 2-24 b will help astronomers refine those models. “The galaxy churns out new stars and planets continuously, so there are many in every stage of evolution,” Cieza said. “That means we can see the entire process in theory, but there is a large gap in what most telescopes can detect. We are mostly blind to these baby planets right now.” To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Artist’s animation depicting Elias 2-24 b, the youngest exoplanet detected to date, still growing within the disk of gas and dust surrounding its young host star. Material from the disk is actively accreting onto the Jupiter-mass planet, which sits within a prominent gap in the disk, supporting the leading theory of giant planet formation. W. M. Keck Observatory/Adam Makarenko Connecting dots The confirmation using Keck data solves a mystery that has puzzled astronomers for a decade. About a decade ago, observations from ALMA (Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array) in Chile showed a gap in the young star’s dusty disk. The European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope in Chile then detected a faint point of light sitting in that gap. Astronomers debated whether it could be a planet; according to planet formation theories, such gaps appear too early and too far from their stars for planets to have formed. Current models predict that it takes about 5 million years to form a Jupiter-size planet at Jupiter’s distance from the Sun (which is just over five times larger than the distance of Earth to the Sun), and even longer farther out. Yet the glowing dot they spotted was 55 times farther from its star than Earth is from the Sun and already behaving like a forming planet. So Bernardi’s team searched the Keck Observatory Archive, a NASA-funded partnership between Keck Observatory and the NASA Exoplanet Science Institute at Caltech/IPAC, for the same little point of light again and found it in observations from 2018 and 2020. They stitched the observations together to analyze its motion over time and found that it behaved more like a planet than an imaging defect or background star, ultimately confirming it as Elias 2-24 b. “We usually hear about telescopes working separately, but this confirmation was possible only by using multiple telescopes together,” Bernardi said. “Elias 2-24 b is at the limit of what current telescopes can detect, but with new instruments like NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, such detections should become easier.” Roman, which just launched Aug. 30, is equipped with an even more powerful coronagraph and is capable of spotting planets that are much harder for other telescopes to see. By employing the same technique, Roman could find planets in much smaller orbits, including true Jupiter analogs that are currently impossible to see through the glare. Elias 2-24 b is about 10 times farther out from its host star. “This is just the beginning of a new era of discovery,” Cieza said. “It’s incredible that with modern technology, we are actually able to see planet formation in action, and Roman will take planet hunting to the next level.” To learn more about NASA’s exploration of exoplanets, visit: https://nasa.gov/exoplanets About the Author Ashley Balzer Ashley is the lead science writer for NASA's Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. Share Details Last Updated Sep 17, 2026 Editor Ashley Balzer Contact Ashley Balzer ashley.m.balzer@nasa.gov Location Goddard Space Flight Center Related Terms The Universe Exoplanet Detection Methods Exoplanet Discoveries Exoplanet Transits Exoplanets Gas Giant Exoplanets Goddard Space Flight Center Stars Explore More 6 min read NASA’s Roman Mission Could Snap First Image of a Jupiter-Like World NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, now under construction, will test new technologies for space-based… Article 5 years ago 6 min read NASA’s Webb Studies How Planet Survived Death of its Star Article 3 months ago 5 min read NASA’s TESS Mission Finds Planetary System in New Way Article 3 months ago

NASA Roman’s Planet Imager Has Powered On NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope team has successfully activated the mission’s Coronagraph Instrument, which will block starlight to view planets and dusty disks around nearby stars. Now the instrument will undergo a monthslong series of calibrations and tests prior to beginning full science operations. The coronagraph power-on began at 7:27 a.m. EDT and completed at 8:22 a.m. on Sept. 1. The Roman Coronagraph is a system of optics, masks, self-flexing mirrors, and sensors designed to demonstrate the most advanced technologies ever flown in space for directly imaging planets around other stars. It will block the glare from stars and make it possible for scientists to see the faint reflected light from planets in orbit around them. Using the coronagraph, scientists will photograph worlds and dusty disks in visible light to help us see giant planets that are older, colder, and in closer orbits than the hot, young super-Jupiters direct imaging has mainly revealed so far. The Roman coronagraph team will conduct a series of pre-planned observations for a total of three months spread across the mission’s first year-and-a-half of operations. In addition to direct imaging, Roman will also find planets via the microlensing and transit methods. Read more about the wide array of worlds Roman will study here . To learn more about Roman’s commissioning process, visit: Roman Commissioning Ashley Balzer September 1, 2026 9:06AM Categories

NASA Concludes Roman Space Telescope Launch Coverage A SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket with NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Telescope on board is seen transiting the sun during launch from Launch Complex 39A, Sunday, Aug. 30, 2026, at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida. NASA NASA is concluding live launch coverage after the agency’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope successfully launched aboard a SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket and separated from the second stage. At 9:30 a.m. EDT NASA will host a postlaunch news conference with the following participants. NASA Administrator Jared Isaacman Nicky Fox, associate administrator, Science Mission Directorate, NASA Headquarters Jackie Townsend, Roman telescope project manager, NASA Goddard Julie McEnery, Roman telescope senior project scientist, NASA Goddard Denton Gibson, launch director, NASA’s Launch Services Program, NASA Kennedy Stream it live at https://www.nasa.gov/live/ . Thank you for following the launch. Continue following Roman’s journey at https://science.nasa.gov/blogs/roman/ and learn more at https://science.nasa.gov/mission/roman-space-telescope/. Elyna Niles-Carnes August 30, 2026 8:09AM Categories

NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Flying on Its Own Spacecraft separation occurs as the payload cleanly detaches from the upper stage, beginning its solo journey into orbit. This milestone follows fairing deployment and stage separation, marking the moment the mission transitions from launch operations to on-orbit commissioning. NASA Editor’s note: Blog has been updated to reflect the approximate time for acquisition of signal . NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope separated from the SpaceX Falcon Heavy’s second stage at 7:57 a.m. EDT and is flying on its own. Roman established communications through a NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite earlier in ascent at 7:33 a.m. Mission controllers will continue monitoring the observatory as it begins its journey toward an orbit around the second Sun-Earth Lagrange point, or L2, about 1 million miles from Earth. When Roman begins science operations, the Near Space Network will transmit Roman’s high rate science data, while the Deep Space Network will continue providing critical tracking data, including the precise range and angle measurements that show ground teams where Roman is in space. Additional support for downlinking Roman data will come from ESA (European Space Agency) and JAXA (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency), through their New Norcia and Misasa ground stations, respectively. In the next 30 minutes, Roman will deploy its Solar Array Sun Shield, which provides power and doubles as a thermal shield. After separation, the four outer panels swing into place to form the full six panel array, keeping the observatory powered and cool for the journey to L2. Follow post-launch updates at https://science.nasa.gov/blogs/roman/. Elyna Niles-Carnes August 30, 2026 7:58AM Categories

Explore This Section Exoplanet Watch When exoplanets pass between us and their stars, the stars’ light dims just a bit. Scientists call the passage of a planet in front of its star a transit. Join Exoplanet Watch and use your own telescope to track these transits and gather data on how they dim their stars. No telescope? No problem! You can use our data checkout system to request data from an exoplanet observation to analyze yourself. You don't have to be a rocket scientist or an astrophysicist to study distant worlds. The project will teach you what you need to know to collect important data on exoplanets. Go to Project Website about Exoplanet Watch project task Collecting data with telescope division Astrophysics where Online or outside Launched 2022 What you'll do Join our Slack channel to interact with a lively community of 2000+ exoplanet enthusiasts! If you have a telescope: observe transiting exoplanets. If you don’t have a telescope: request data from a robotic telescope. Analyze your data using free software called “EXOTIC” (our community will help you get started). Upload your results to the American Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO) Exoplanet Database . See your data included on the Exoplanet Watch Results webpage and used for further research. Requirements Time to get started: 2-4 minutes to complete online training. Equipment: Web-connected device. Knowledge: None. An in-project tutorial is provided. Get started! Start with this checklist https://science.nasa.gov/citizen-science/exoplanet-watch/how-to-contribute/ . Learn about exoplanets from our Resources collection . Get some data (from your own telescope or our checkout system) and start looking for exoplanets! Learn More Exoplanet Watch is on Slack! Join the project’s workspace to meet other Exoplanet Watch participants, ask questions, troubleshoot problems, get updates on the biweekly full team meetings, and more. This community is a fun, friendly, helpful group. Beginners are welcome. Join our Slack channel . You can also subscribe to free Exoplanet Watch Monthly Newsletters , which include information about exoplanets to observe, new project features, information on topics that will be covered in bi-weekly meetings, a featured member of the month and astrophoto of the month, and links to exoplanet resources. Want to learn more about exoplanet discovery right now? Take a look and listen to this entertaining and informative presentation by Exoplanet Watch’s lead scientist Rob Zellem of the Jet Propulsion Lab to colleagues at Goddard Space Flight Center. A lightcurve of a transiting exoplanet, a plot of how the star’s brightness changes with time. When a planet passes in front of its host star, it blocks some of that star's light. The blue dots in the middle of the graph are lower than those to the right and left, showing how the light from this star dimmed. From this dimming, we can measure the planet’s size and learn about its chemical composition. Credit: Exoplanet Watch project Citizen scientist Bryan E. Martin uses his personal telescope to observe exoplanet transits with NASA’s Universe of Learning Exoplanet Watch . Credit: Bryan E. Martin Get to know the people of Exoplanet Watch! Rob Zellem Astronomer Read Bio John Engelke Software developer Read Bio Tamim Fatahi Undergraduate Intern Read Bio Isabella “Izzy” Huckabee Undergraduate Intern Read Bio Kiah May Undergraduate Intern Read Bio Kyle Pearson Deputy Science Lead; EXOTIC Development Lead Read Bio Michael Primm Exoplanet volunteer/ Chief Technology Officer Read Bio Kalée Tock Exoplanet volunteer/ High School Science Teacher Read Bio Meet the full Exoplanet Watch team Keep Exploring Discover More Citizen Science Projects X-Snow New Yorkers: Help scientists measure snow on the ground using your phone! For anyone in the Catskills or Adirondacks region. Dark Energy Explorers Uncover dark energy, a mysterious force driving galaxies apart. For anyone with a smartphone or laptop. Burst Chaser Help decipher signals of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), the most energetic and mysterious explosions in the universe! For anyone with a… JunoCam Share your images of Jupiter and participate in the JunoCam mission. For anyone with a laptop.

Explore This Section UNITE: Unistellar Network Investigating TESS Exoplanets NASA’s Transiting Exoplanet Sky Survey mission has identified many new exoplanets! Astronomers now need your help to characterize the orbits of these exoplanets as a first step in learning about them. Join the worldwide Unistellar global network of amateur and professional astronomers working to document the timing of exoplanets' transits (a “transit” happens when a planet passes in front of its star, briefly blocking the starlight). We are tracking both the frequency and length of transit periods to better describe the orbits. Go to Project Website about UNITE: Unistellar Network Investigating TESS Exoplanets project task Collecting data with telescope division Astrophysics where Outdoors under the night sky – in dark countryside and also in bright cities. launched 2022 An artist’s interpretation of a gas giant in its planetary system. Credit: NASA/JPL What you'll do Use your own telescope to observe newly discovered exoplanets and collect information about its transits to help characterize its orbit. Coordinate with other citizen scientists and researchers around the globe to track and learn about these new worlds. Requirements Time to get started: 5-15 minutes to complete the tutorial; observations take 1+ hours Equipment: Unistellar or similar telescope Knowledge: None. An in-project tutorial provides all instruction needed. Get started! Visit our project get started page . Pick your target based on your location and note the observation details. 10 minutes before the predicted transit, point your telescope at the target (detailed instructions provided). Observe the system and fill out an online observation report. Learn More Questions about exoplanets? Check out the Learn About Exoplanets section of our website. You can also read about what our global collaboration has accomplished to date in our Results section. If you don’t have a Unistellar telescope, you can still participate! Visit our website to learn how . Follow UNITE’s parent organizations Unistellar and The SETI Institute on X! A screenshot from the Pick Your Target page for the North America region. Each symbol has a meaning: Blue stars & shading = you can observe the entire event. Yellow triangles = you can observe the entire event but you may have brief tracking difficulty due to the high altitude of the target star. Orange diamonds = you may miss the start or end of the event but your data will still be useful. Credit : Unistellar To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Video Credit : SETI Institute/Unistellar/T. Esposito Get to know the people of UNITE! Tom Esposito UNITE Principal Investigator, Exoplanets Co-Lead, Pipeline Development/ Exoplanet Detection Scientist Read More Lauren Sgro Data Analysis, Communications/ Astronomer, SETI Read More Franck Marchis Outreach, Communications/ Planetary Sciences Read More Michael Primm Citizen Scientist/ Chief Technology Officer Read More Petri Kuossari Citizen Scientist | Information Technology (IT) Manager Read More

Explore This Section Solar System Facts Our solar system has one star, eight planets, five dwarf planets, hundreds of moons and thousands of comets and asteroids. Introduction Namesake Potential for Life Size and Distance Moons Formation Structure Contents Introduction Namesake Potential for Life Size and Distance Moons Formation Structure Introduction An illustration of our solar system. NASA/JPL-Caltech Our solar system includes the Sun, eight planets, five officially named dwarf planets, hundreds of moons, and thousands of asteroids and comets. Our solar system is located in the Milky Way, a barred spiral galaxy with two major arms, and two minor arms. Our Sun is in a small, partial arm of the Milky Way called the Orion Arm, or Orion Spur, between the Sagittarius and Perseus arms. Our solar system orbits the center of the galaxy at about 515,000 mph (828,000 kph). It takes about 230 million years to complete one orbit around the galactic center. Namesake Our planetary system is called “the solar system” because we use the word “solar” to describe things related to our star, after the Latin word for Sun, "solis." Potential for Life So far, we've only know about life on Earth, but NASA is searching for life on other worlds in our solar system and beyond. Size and Distance Our solar system extends much farther than the planets that orbit the Sun. The solar system also includes the Kuiper Belt that lies past Neptune's orbit. This is a ring of icy bodies, almost all smaller than the most popular Kuiper Belt Object – dwarf planet Pluto . Beyond the fringes of the Kuiper Belt is the Oort Cloud . This giant spherical shell surrounds our solar system. It has never been directly observed, but its existence is predicted based on mathematical models and observations of comets that likely originate there. The Oort Cloud is made of icy pieces of space debris - some bigger than mountains – orbiting our Sun as far as 1.6 light-years away. This shell of material is thick, extending from 5,000 astronomical units to 100,000 astronomical units. One astronomical unit (or AU) is the distance from the Sun to Earth, or about 93 million miles (150 million kilometers). The Oort Cloud is the boundary of the Sun's gravitational influence, where orbiting objects can turn around and return closer to our Sun. The Sun's heliosphere doesn't extend quite as far. The heliosphere is the bubble created by the solar wind – a stream of electrically charged gas blowing outward from the Sun in all directions. The boundary where the solar wind is abruptly slowed by pressure from interstellar gases is called the termination shock. This edge occurs between 80-100 astronomical units. Two NASA spacecraft launched in 1977 have crossed the termination shock: Voyager 1 in 2004 and Voyager 2 in 2007. Voyager 1 went interstellar in 2012 and Voyager 2 joined it in 2018. But it will be many thousands of years before the two Voyagers exit the Oort Cloud. The simulated view shows the position of the planets when Voyager 1 captured its one-of-a-kind solar system "family portrait" that shows six of our solar system's planets. NASA/JPL-Caltech Moons In addition to Earth's Moon, our solar system has hundreds of moons orbiting planets, dwarf planets, and asteroids. Of the eight planets, Mercury and Venus are the only ones with no moons, although Venus does have a quasi-satellite that has officially been named Zoozve . The giant planets Jupiter and Saturn lead our solar system’s moon counts. In some ways, the swarms of moons around these worlds resemble mini versions of our solar system. Pluto, smaller than our own moon, has five moons in its orbit, including Charon, a moon so large it makes Pluto wobble. Get the latest tally of moons in our solar system Formation Our solar system formed about 4.6 billion years ago from a dense cloud of interstellar gas and dust. The cloud collapsed, possibly due to the shockwave of a nearby exploding star, called a supernova. When this dust cloud collapsed, it formed a solar nebula – a spinning, swirling disk of material. At the center, gravity pulled more and more material in. Eventually, the pressure in the core was so great that hydrogen atoms began to combine and form helium, releasing a tremendous amount of energy. With that, our Sun was born, and it eventually amassed more than 99% of the available matter. Matter farther out in the disk was also clumping together. These clumps smashed into one another, forming larger and larger objects. Some of them grew big enough for their gravity to shape them into spheres, becoming planets, dwarf planets, and large moons. In other cases, planets did not form: the asteroid belt is made of bits and pieces of the early solar system that could never quite come together into a planet. Other smaller leftover pieces became asteroids, comets, meteoroids, and small, irregular moons. Structure The order and arrangement of the planets and other bodies in our solar system is due to the way the solar system formed. Nearest to the Sun, only rocky material could withstand the heat when the solar system was young. For this reason, the first four planets – Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars – are terrestrial planets. They are all small with solid, rocky surfaces. Meanwhile, materials we are used to seeing as ice, liquid, or gas settled in the outer regions of the young solar system. Gravity pulled these materials together, and that is where we find gas giants Jupiter and Saturn, and the ice giants Uranus and Neptune. Solar System News Blog 3 Min Read NASA’s DAVINCI Beats Heat in Preparation for Blistering Venus Descent Article 3 Min Read Embracing the Equinox 5 Min Read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Article 2 Min Read NASA’s Integrated Medical Model (IMM) Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section About the Planets Our solar system has eight planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. There are five officially recognized dwarf planets in our solar system: Ceres, Pluto, Haumea, Makemake, and Eris. 8 Planets 5 Dwarf Planets Introduction What is a planet? The word traces back to the ancient Greek word planēt, which means “wanderer.” A more modern definition can be found in the Merriam-Webster dictionary, which defines a planet as “any of the large bodies that revolve around the Sun in the solar system.” In 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) — a group of astronomers that names objects in our solar system — agreed on their own definition of “planet.” This new definition caused Pluto's famous “demotion” to a dwarf planet, and reduced the solar system census from nine planets to eight. Learn More: ‘What is a planet?’ Saturn's Shapes NASA’s Hubble Tracks New Decagon Encircling Saturn’s South Pole Recent observations with NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope have revealed a giant, evolving, 10-sided atmospheric wave encircling Saturn's south pole. This discovery marks the first time a large, regular-sided jet pattern has been observed in the planet's southern hemisphere. Learn about Saturn's Decagon NASA, ESA, STScI, Agustin Sánchez-Lavega (UPV), Amy Simon (NASA-GSFC), Michael Wong (UC Berkeley); Image Processing: Alyssa Pagan Saturn's Hexagon In Saturn's northern hemisphere, an enormous spinning hexagon in the clouds at its north pole was first spotted in the 1980s. The hurricane-like vortex has an eye about 50 times larger than a typical Earth hurricane, and a maximum wind speed about double that of the strongest cyclones here. Learn about Saturn's Hexagon NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute Inner Planets The first four planets from the Sun are Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. These inner planets also are known as terrestrial planets because they have solid surfaces. Mercury Facts Mercury is the planet nearest to the Sun, and the smallest planet in our solar system. Explore Mercury Venus Facts Venus is the second planet from the Sun, and the sixth largest planet. Explore Venus Earth Facts Earth – our home planet – is the third planet from the Sun, and the fifth largest planet. Explore Earth Mars Facts Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun, and the seventh largest planet. Explore Mars Outer Planets The giant planets in the outer solar system don't have hard surfaces. Instead, they have swirling gases above a core. Jupiter and Saturn are gas giants. Uranus and Neptune are ice giants. Jupiter Facts Jupiter is the fifth planet from the Sun, and the largest planet in our solar system. Explore Jupiter Saturn Facts Saturn is the sixth planet from the Sun, the second largest planet in our solar system. Explore Saturn Uranus Facts Uranus is the seventh planet from the Sun, and the third largest planet in our solar system. Explore Uranus Neptune Facts Neptune is the eighth and most distant planet in our solar system. It's the fourth largest planet. Explore Neptune Dwarf Planets Dwarf planets include longtime favorite Pluto, Ceres, Makemake, Haumea, and Eris. Ceres is the only dwarf planet in the inner solar system. It's in the main asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. Ceres Facts Dwarf planet Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, and it's the only dwarf planet in the inner solar system. Explore Ceres Pluto Facts Pluto was long considered our solar system's ninth planet. It was reclassified as a dwarf planet in 2006 by the International Astronomical Union. Explore Pluto Haumea Facts Haumea was nicknamed Santa by one discovery team. It is oval-shaped, and is one of the fastest rotating large objects in our solar system. Explore Haumea Makemake Facts Makemake is slightly smaller than Pluto, and is the second-brightest object in the Kuiper Belt, while Pluto is the brightest. Explore Makemake Eris Facts The discovery of Eris helped trigger the debate in the scientific community that led to the decision to clarify the definition of a planet. Explore Eris Featured Story Planet Sizes and Locations in Our Solar System Our solar system has eight planets, and five officially recognized dwarf planets. Which planet is biggest? Which is smallest? What… Read the Story Hypothetical Planet X Is There Another Planet in the Solar System? It's an intriguing idea that might explain some current mysteries, but direct evidence of another planet has yet to be found. Learn More Featured Story Temperatures Across Our Solar System Let’s look at the mean temperature of the Sun, and the planets in our solar system. Read the Story Facebook logo @NASASolarSystem @NASASolarSystem Instagram logo @NASASolarSystem Keep Exploring Discover More Solar System Exploration Kuiper Belt Oort Cloud Exoplanets

Explore This Section Moons of Our Solar System Naturally-formed bodies that orbit planets are called moons, or planetary satellites. Moons come in many shapes, sizes, and types. There are hundreds of moons in our solar system. featured moons Earth's Moon The Moon makes Earth more livable by moderating its wobble. Moons of Mars Mars has two small moons - Phobos and Deimos. Moons of Jupiter Dozens of moons swarm around this giant world. Moons of Saturn Saturn has more moons than any other planet. Moons of Uranus Uranus moons are named for great literature. Moons of Neptune Neptune has 16 known moons. Moons of Pluto Pluto has five moons. Moon Facts Moon Count Explore Our Solar System's Moons Our solar system has hundreds of known moons orbiting planets and dwarf planets. Even some asteroids have moons. Moons – also called natural satellites – come in many shapes, sizes and types. They are generally solid bodies, and a few have atmospheres. Get the Facts This montage of views from NASA's Cassini spacecraft shows three of Saturn's small ring moons: Atlas, Daphnis and Pan at the same scale for ease of comparison. NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute How Many Moons? Hundreds of moons orbit planets, dwarf planets, asteroids and trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs). Number of Moons Orbiting Planets NASA's Cassini spacecraft captured five of Saturn's moons in a single frame on July 29, 2011, NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute More Moons Moons, or natural satellites, also orbit dwarf planets, comets, asteroids, and Trans-Neptunian Objects (icy bodies that orbit the Sun beyond the orbit of Neptune). Earth's Moon All About Our Moon From lighting up our skies to maintaining a geological record of our solar system’s history, Earth’s closest celestial neighbor plays a pivotal role in the study of our planet and our solar system. Explore It's Just a Phase Sometimes the entire face of the Moon glows brightly. Other times we see only a thin crescent of light. Sometimes the Moon seems to disappear. These shifts are called moon phases . Learn the Moon's Phases The Moon passes through the Pleiades star cluster. NASA/Preston Dyches News About Moons 24 Min Read What Webb Is Teaching Us About Our Solar System Article 7 Min Read Webb’s Titan Forecast: Partly Cloudy With Occasional Methane Showers Article 3 Min Read NASA Moon Observing Instrument to Get Another Shot at Lunar Ops Image Article 2 Min Read NASA’s Dust Shield Successfully Repels Lunar Regolith on Moon Moons in our Solar System 11 Images Go To Gallery Go To Gallery Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Hypothetical Planet X Caltech researchers have found evidence suggesting there may be a "Planet X" deep in the solar system. Exoplanets

Skywatching 3 min read What’s Up: September 2026 Skywatching Tips from NASA Raquel Villanueva Sep 01, 2026 Article Contents Brilliant Venus and a Harvest Moon Skywatching Highlights Transcript Brilliant Venus and a Harvest Moon Use the Moon to find Antares and the Teapot, spot brilliant Venus, welcome the equinox, and see the Harvest Moon near Saturn and Neptune. Skywatching Highlights Sept. 14-20: Use the Moon to find Antares and the Teapot; dark skies may reveal the Milky Way center Sept 18: Venus reaches peak brilliance for this evening appearance Sept. 22: September equinox; fall begins in the Northern Hemisphere and spring in the Southern Hemisphere Sept. 26: Harvest Moon rises near Saturn and Neptune Birds fly over a barn as a harvest Moon rises. Mike Linnihan Transcript The Moon joins a tea party… Venus cranks up the brightness… the seasons officially change… and the Harvest Moon meets up with some planetary neighbors. That's What's Up for September. A sky chart looking southwest after sunset on Sept. 20, 2026. NASA/JPL-Caltech From September 14 through 20, let the Moon guide you to a few celestial landmarks. About an hour after sunset, look south to find the Moon in the evening sky. Night by night, the Moon shifts position against the background stars, passing near Antares. This bright, reddish star marks the heart of the constellation Scorpius. Next you'll see the Teapot, a group of stars in neighboring Sagittarius that really does resemble a teapot, complete with a handle, lid, and spout. If you are under an especially dark sky… you may see hazy steam rising from the Teapot's spout. Follow that steam to its thickest part, and you'll be looking toward the center of our Milky Way galaxy. A sky chart looking west after sunset on Sept. 18, 2026. NASA/JPL-Caltech Look west on September 18 as Venus hits peak brilliance, shining at its brightest of this evening appearance.. You won't have to search hard to find it. Shortly after sunset, Venus will stand out as a brilliant point of light low above the western horizon, outshining every star around it. A clear view of the horizon will give you the best chance to catch it before it sets. On September 19, celebrate International Observe the Moon Night! People around the world are invited to look up and connect with our nearest celestial neighbor while learning more about lunar science, exploration, and the many ways the Moon has shaped cultures around the world. Find an event near you — or learn how to participate from wherever you are — at go.nasa.gov/ObserveTheMoon . Then on September 22, it's officially fall in the Northern Hemisphere …while spring begins in the Southern Hemisphere. That's the September equinox, when the Sun is directly above Earth's equator and day and night are close to equal in length around the world. From there, daylight keeps getting shorter in the Northern Hemisphere and longer in the Southern Hemisphere. A sky chart looking east after sunset on Sept. 26, 2026. NASA/JPL-Caltech And on September 26, the Harvest Moon takes center stage, rising in the east shortly after sunset. It won't be alone. Saturn appears nearby, with faint Neptune completing a wide triangle in the sky. Saturn is the easy one-you can see it with just your eyes. Neptune is a bit more challenging. At around magnitude 8, it's too faint to see with the unaided eye …so you'll need binoculars or a telescope to spot it. Darker skies and good observing conditions can help bring it into view. Here are the phases of the Moon for September. The phases of the Moon for September 2026. NASA/JPL-Caltech You can stay up to date on all of NASA's missions exploring the solar system and beyond at NASA Science . I'm Raquel Villanueva from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and that's What's Up this month. Learn More and Get Involved Night Sky Network The Night Sky Network is a nationwide coalition of amateur astronomy clubs bringing the science, technology, and inspiration of NASA's missions to the general public. NASA Skywatching Resources Expert skywatching tips and more from our experts. Share Details Last Updated Sep 01, 2026 Related Terms Skywatching Earth's Moon Neptune Saturn Skywatching Tips The Solar System Venus Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA What’s Up Skywatching Earth’s Moon The Moon makes Earth more livable, sets the rhythm of ocean tides, and keeps a record of our solar system's… Solar System Exploration

6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater A zoomed-in view of the Moon made from images from NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera. (More information at the bottom of article.) Credits: NASA Goddard/Intuitive Machines/Robert Wagner Lonnie Shekhtman Senior Science Writer Sep 16, 2026 Article Contents Moon takes some hits Road to discovery It started as a routine data-quality check. But as Robert Wagner, a scientist with NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), scanned a giant Moon map on his computer screen, an unusually large bright spot circled by a dark halo caught his eye, as it implied that surface material in that area had been shaken up. “I just stopped, dropped everything, and started looking into what that spot was,” said Wagner, an image-processing specialist from Intuitive Machines who works with data from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) system. By comparing before and after images of the Moon, Wagner realized he had discovered the largest, newly formed crater ever found in the solar system, as scientists reported Wednesday in Science Advances . This discovery highlights the value of NASA’s Moon orbiter data in studying a dynamic landscape as the agency advances a sustained human presence and expanded scientific and commercial activity on the Moon. A zoomed-in view of McGetchin crater, circled on the left, next to a “before” image on the right. The panel on the left is made from images captured by NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Wide-Angle Camera in summer 2025; the right panel was made from images taken in spring 2011. The white spot is not the crater itself, but rather material flung out of the crater, which formed when a rock, possibly this size of a three- to six‑story building, crashed into the Moon between April 11 and May 22, 2024 – a once-in-a-century event, as scientists reported on Sept. 15, 2026, in a pair of papers in Science Advances. The area shown in the images is 38 miles wide. NASA Goddard/Intuitive Machines/Robert Wagner Officially named McGetchin after pioneering lunar scientist Tom McGetchin, the crater formed on the Moon’s eastern edge sometime between April 11 and May 22, 2024, after a comet or asteroid the size of a three- to six-story building hit the surface. The crash left a crater, 728 feet wide, that spans the length of two football fields. And at 141 feet deep, the crater could fit three vertically stacked yellow school buses. Scientists estimate that an impact of this magnitude happens on the Moon about once in a century or even longer. Moon takes some hits For more than 17 years, LRO has been circling the Moon and using its seven instruments to map the topography, surface composition, temperature, and radiation environment there. The spacecraft’s team has identified at least 1,000 new impact craters throughout the mission and flagged 100,000 more surface changes from an object smashing into the Moon or from the debris that flung out after. With no atmosphere to slow them or burn them up, space rocks and other objects easily reach the lunar surface. Most are much smaller compared to the object that carved out McGetchin crater. The smallest craters scientists can distinguish from LRO images are about 30 feet wide, the length of a three-story building laid on its side, made by rocks about 43 inches wide, the size of a monster-truck tire. Scientists estimate that impacts of this scale produce about 140 new craters across the Moon each year. But most new ones are made by microscopic projectiles that leave holes too small to identify in orbital images. With its numerous instruments, the spacecraft can observe changes to the lunar surface that aren’t apparent in the LROC images alone. After the crater was discovered, scientists working with LRO’s thermal instrument, Diviner, made follow-up observations of the site. They found a 4-mile-wide area around the crater that is about 16 degrees Fahrenheit cooler at night than its surroundings. This animated image set shows an area on the eastern limb of the Moon before and after McGetchin crater formed there sometime between April 11 and May 22, 2024. The post-impact image was constructed using data taken by NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) thermal instrument, Diviner, between Nov. 15, 2025, and Feb. 18, 2026, after scientists discovered the crater in visible-light images taken by LRO’s Wide-Angle Camera. Pre-impact temperatures are from the Diviner Global High-Resolution Mosaics (GHRM). The crater formed on the Moon after a comet or asteroid, possibly the size of a six-story building, hit the surface in a rare, once-in-a-century collision. The dark blue strip that flashes into view reveals a 4-mile-wide “cold spot” around the crater that is about 16 degrees Fahrenheit cooler at night than its surroundings. This cooling happens because an impact fluffs up regolith around a crater, making it less dense and therefore less able to retain heat. Scientists on the Diviner team reported this finding in a paper published on Sept. 16, 2026, in Science Advances. The red and yellow spots indicate areas typically associated with rocks excavated by long-ago impacts which, though still at cryogenic temperatures like their surroundings, remain slightly warmer at night. NASA Goddard/UCLA/JHU APL Reporting in a second paper Wednesday in the same journal , researchers say that the cooling happens because the impact fluffs up the regolith around the crater, making it less dense and therefore less able to retain heat. The large extent of this “cold spot” is striking, scientists say, because it shows that impacts can modify the Moon’s surface far beyond the crater itself. These physical changes could affect how rover wheels interact with the surface, for instance. A global view of the Moon made by stitching together hundreds of images from the Wide-Angle Camera aboard NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO). Robert Wagner, image processing specialist for LRO, made this map using two sets of mages taken several years apart. He used a software designed to highlight any changes between the two sets. Anything that stayed the same turned gray; anything different showed up as bright or dark patches. A black arrow just left of center points to McGetchin crater. NASA Goddard/Intuitive Machines/Robert Wagner Road to discovery The LROC system collects images from about 60 miles above the Moon as LRO loops from pole to pole. The system includes two cameras that capture high‑resolution black‑and‑white images and one camera for moderate‑resolution multispectral images. Over the years and thousands of passes, scientists have built maps detailed enough to spot not only new craters, but also landslides, landers, seismic faults, and even hints of lava tubes. LROC scientists regularly analyze close-up images of small portions of the Moon's surface taken by the Narrow-Angle Camera. Using these images, they look for changes that are typically less than 30 feet across. But every few years the team searches for large (wider than 150 feet) features by creating global Moon maps and comparing them to older versions. An overhead, close-up view of McGetchin crater that was taken on Dec. 5, 2025, by NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Narrow-Angle Camera (NAC). After the crater was discovered on Oct. 24, 2025, in global images from LRO’s Wide-Angle Camera, which captures broad views with pixels the size of American football fields, scientists turned to the NAC, which takes much sharper views at about 3 feet per pixel. The NAC images, taken as LRO flew over the impact site again, revealed the crater size, shape, and how the surrounding terrain was affected by the impact that carved McGetchin. The image covers an area that’s ¾ mile wide. NASA Goddard/Intuitive Machines This view from the side (55° away from straight down) towards the east, covers an area of the Moon that’s about 1.5 miles wide. It was taken by NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Narrow-Angle Camera on March 3, 2026. NASA Goddard/Intuitive Machines That’s what Wagner was doing on Oct. 24, 2025, when he came across McGetchin. Using images from LROC’s Wide-Angle Camera, which captures broad views with pixels the size of football fields, he stacked hundreds of “before” and “after” frames with software designed to highlight change. Anything that stayed the same turned gray while anything different showed up as bright or dark patches. While the process sounds straightforward, spotting real craters requires a lot of manual work. The software flags every tiny shift in lighting or shadow, generating hundreds of false alarms. For this reason, Wagner typically verifies the software, looking for small fuzzy halos around pixel‑wide bright points, which indicate splashes of regolith around a new crater. Spanning hundreds of pixels, McGetchin stood out immediately. “It was by far the most obvious impact debris pattern I’ve ever seen in one of these images,” Wagner said. After his discovery, scientists turned to the Narrow-Angle Camera, which takes much sharper views at about 3 feet per pixel. This camera’s close-up images, taken as LRO flew over the impact site again, revealed the crater size, shape, and how the surrounding terrain was affected. These images also helped researchers estimate the size and force of the rock fragment that formed the new crater, details that are expected to appear in a future paper. Banner image caption: A zoomed-in view of the Moon, with debris around McGetchin crater visible as a white spot circled by a dark halo just right of center of the image (marked with black arrows). This is the view that Robert Wagner saw on Oct. 24, 2025, during a routine data-quality check. Wagner is an image processing specialist for NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera, a system of three cameras. Using images from the Wide-Angle Camera (WAC), which captures broad views with pixels the size of American football fields, he stacked hundreds of images captured by WAC over the last several years with software designed to highlight change. Anything that stayed the same is gray; anything that changed showed up as bright or dark patches. The stripes in the image are due to slight changes in lighting between the older and newer images. This image composite shows an area of the Moon approximately 900 miles across. About the Author Lonnie Shekhtman Senior Science Writer Shekhtman helps communicate NASA planetary science to the world through news and feature stories on NASA.gov, videos for NASA+ and YouTube, and by working with the media. She reports on lunar and Mars science and exploration; NASA's search for life; missions to Venus, Titan, and Jupiter's Trojan asteroids; and many other topics related to NASA's exploration of our solar system and beyond. Share Details Last Updated Sep 16, 2026 Related Terms Earth's Moon Asteroids Craters Goddard Space Flight Center Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Lunar Science Missions NASA Centers & Facilities NASA Directorates Planetary Environments & Atmospheres Planetary Science Planetary Science Division Science & Research Science Mission Directorate The Solar System Explore More 4 min read NASA Tests Dual Mode Propulsion CubeSat Ahead of Launch Spacecraft propulsion traditionally relies on volatile fuels and separate, bulky systems for different types of… Article 1 day ago 4 min read TB 26-07 Aluminum Alloy 2219 Material Guidance For more information, contact Donald S. Parker, Kennedy Space Center, donald.s.parker@nasa.gov Download the PDF version… Article 2 days ago 5 min read Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the… Article 2 days ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Missions Humans in Space Climate Change Solar System

8 Min Read 10 Things: Going Interstellar An artist’s concept of the Milky Way. Credits: NASA/JPL-Caltech/R. Hurt (SSC/Ca AMANDA BARNETT Writer/Editor Jul 26, 2022 Article Contents Introduction 1. The Space Between 2. Are we there yet? No. Seriously, this trip is going to take a while. 3. What does it look like out there? Where are my interstellar photos? 4. Sounds of silence? Not if you know how to listen. 5. Didn’t we have an interstellar visitor? 6. Boldly going where no spacecraft have gone before. 7. Escape Velocity: What it takes to go interstellar. 8. Cosmic Overachievers: Still exploring after all these years. 9. OK, the Voyagers have made it to interstellar space. What now? 10. Beyond the Voyagers: Next steps for exploring interstellar space Introduction Humanity’s great leap into interstellar space – the space between the stars – is underway. NASA's Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 probes are both in interstellar space. For the moment, sending humans to the edge of interstellar space, let alone across the cosmic void to other stars, remains firmly in the realm of science fiction. But scientists and engineers are developing skills and technologies that might help us get there one day. Here are 10 things we’ve learned about going interstellar. 1. The Space Between Download Voyager retro posters to print and share. NASA/JPL-Caltech Interstellar space is often called the space between the stars, but more specifically, it’s the region between our Sun’s heliosphere and the astrospheres of other stars. Our heliosphere is a vast bubble of plasma – a gas of charged particles – that spews out of the Sun. This outflow is known as the solar wind. The bubble surrounds the Sun and stretches beyond the planets. Both Voyager spacecraft had to travel more than 11 billion miles (17 billion kilometers) from the Sun in order to cross the edge of the heliosphere. This bubble is moving through interstellar space as the Sun orbits the center of the Milky Way galaxy. As our heliosphere plows through space, it creates a bow wave, like the wave formed by the bow of a ship. 2. Are we there yet? No. Seriously, this trip is going to take a while. The cameras of Voyager 1 on Feb. 14, 1990, pointed back toward the Sun and took a series of pictures of the Sun and the planets, making the first ever "portrait" of our solar system as seen from the outside. This series contains the famous "Pale Blue Dot" image. NASA/JPL-Caltech Since warp drive is still just a fantasy, getting to interstellar space takes a really long time at present. Voyager 1 , the first spacecraft to make it, was about 122 Astronomical Units (Earth is one Astronomical Unit, or AU, from the Sun) – that’s about 11 billion miles (18 billion kilometers) from the Sun – when it exited the heliosphere and entered interstellar space. The spacecraft launched from Florida in 1977 and entered interstellar space on Aug. 25, 2012. That’s a 35-year trip. Of course, Voyager 1 didn’t make a beeline for interstellar space – it took the scenic route and toured Jupiter and Saturn first. Voyager 2 , traveling slower than Voyager 1, also toured Uranus and Neptune, and took 41 years to reach interstellar space. 3. What does it look like out there? Where are my interstellar photos? Sorry, no Voyager selfies. After Voyager 1 took images in 1990 for the "Solar System Family Portrait” that included the famous “ Pale Blue Dot " photo, the cameras were turned off to save power and computer memory for the interstellar mission to come. Additionally, the camera software was removed, and the computers on the ground that understand the software do not exist anymore. The cameras also have been exposed to extreme cold for many years. So, even if mission managers rebuilt the ground computers, reloaded the camera software, and turned the cameras back on, it's not clear they would work. If it's any consolation, there's not much for the Voyagers to see now except for the stars, and they wouldn't look much different than they did in 1990. 4. Sounds of silence? Not if you know how to listen. You shouldn't be able to hear anything in interstellar space, because it’s a near-perfect vacuum: There's essentially no medium for the soundwaves to travel though, like air. But Voyager's instruments are much more sensitive than our ears, and the instruments were able to "listen" to other kinds of waves that travel through the interstellar medium. What they heard was music to scientists' ears. Don Gurnett, the principal investigator for the Plasma Wave Science instrument on Voyager 1, played an audio recording of plasma wave data at a press conference in September 2013. The sounds, he explained, were solid evidence that Voyager 1 had left the heliosphere and was in interstellar space. Strictly speaking, the plasma wave instrument doesn’t detect sound. It senses waves in the plasma that are generated by eruptions on the Sun, known as coronal mass ejections. These waves influence the interstellar medium, so Voyager can detect them both inside and outside of the heliosphere. The plasma is so diluted that waves traveling through it would be far too weak for our ears to detect. But, because some of those waves fall into the "audio frequency" range, all Gurnett had to do was amplify the sound to make them audible to human ears. 5. Didn’t we have an interstellar visitor? This very deep combined image shows the interstellar object ‘Oumuamua at the center of the image. It is surrounded by the trails of faint stars that are smeared as the telescopes tracked the moving comet. ESO/K. Meech et al. An intriguing object zipped through our solar system in late 2017. It was on a steep trajectory that told scientists it wasn’t from around here. They determined it was from interstellar space — the first confirmed object from another solar system to visit our solar system. Scientists named the object ‘Oumuamua , a Hawaiian word meaning "visitor from afar arriving first.” So what was it? Because 'Oumuamua was the first of its kind and wasn't observed in great detail at close range, researchers found it difficult to draw conclusions . But whatever it was — it was big, it was moving fast, and it was tumbling through space. 'Oumuamua is highly elongated and estimated to be less than half a mile (2,600 feet, or 800 meters) in its longest dimension. It was last detected traveling away from the Sun at about 196,000 mph or 87.3 kilometers per second — on its way back to interstellar space. After January 2018, 'Oumuamua was no longer visible to telescopes, even in space. 6. Boldly going where no spacecraft have gone before. This illustration shows the position of NASA's Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 probes, outside of the heliosphere, a protective bubble created by the Sun that extends well past the orbit of Pluto. NASA/JPL-Caltech Only two spacecraft have made it to interstellar space. Voyager 1 was the first, in August 2012. Six years later, its twin, Voyager 2, entered interstellar space on Nov. 5, 2018. The New Horizons probe that explored Pluto and the Kuiper Belt Object named Arrokoth is also headed toward interstellar space, generally in the direction of the constellation Sagittarius. NASA's Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11 have both stopped functioning, but they also are coasting into interstellar space as ghost ships. Pioneer 10 is heading toward the red star Aldebaran in the constellation Taurus. Pioneer 11 is traveling toward the center of the galaxy in the direction of Sagittarius. Voyager 2 was launched on August 20, 1977 propelled into space on a powerful Titan/Centaur rocket. NASA/JPL-Caltech 7. Escape Velocity: What it takes to go interstellar. This animated graph shows data returned from Voyager 2's cosmic ray and plasma science instruments, which provided the evidence that the spacecraft had entered interstellar space. NASA/JPL-Caltech/GSFC Hundreds of spacecraft have been launched beyond Earth, so why are only five spaceships headed out of our solar system? Well, most spacecraft aren’t meant to leave the solar system. They’re designed to fly by, orbit, or land on a planet. To go to interstellar space, a probe needs to be launched into a specific orbit, and by a rocket powerful enough to give it the velocity to break free of the Sun's gravity. Even using our biggest rockets, some probes need a boost. The Voyagers took advantage of a rare arrangement of the outer planets which occurs about every 176 years. The probes used gravity assists to swing from one planet to the next without needing large propulsion systems. Three of the flybys increased the velocity of the probes enough to deliver them to the next planet, climbing further out of the grip of the Sun's gravity. 8. Cosmic Overachievers: Still exploring after all these years. The Voyager message is carried by a phonograph record, a 12-inch gold-plated copper disk containing sounds and images selected to portray the diversity of life and culture on Earth. NASA/JPL-Caltech Voyager 1 and 2 were launched 16 days apart in 1977. Voyager 2 was launched first, but Voyager 1 was on a faster trajectory. They are the longest continuously operating spacecraft. Between them, they’ve explored all the gas giant planets in our solar system. While the probes are now in interstellar space, they haven’t truly left the solar system. The boundary of the solar system is considered to be beyond the Oort Cloud, a collection of small objects still under the influence of the Sun. Most comets that visit the inner solar system come from the Oort Cloud. It could take the probes 300 years to reach the inner edge of that region. 9. OK, the Voyagers have made it to interstellar space. What now? Eventually, the Voyagers will pass other stars. Voyager 1 is escaping the solar system at a speed of about 3.5 AU per year, 35 degrees out of the ecliptic plane to the north, in the general direction of the solar apex — that's the direction of the Sun's motion relative to nearby stars. Voyager 1 will leave the solar system aiming toward the constellation Ophiuchus. In the year 40,272 CE (more than 38,200 years from now), Voyager 1 will come within 1.7 light-years of an obscure star now in the constellation Ursa Minor (the Little Bear or Little Dipper) called Gliese 445. Voyager 2 is escaping the solar system at a speed of about 3.1 AU per year toward the constellations of Sagittarius and Pavo. In about 40,000 years, Voyager 2 will come within about 1.7 light-years of a star called Ross 248, a small star now in the constellation of Andromeda. After that, the Voyagers are destined to orbit in the Milky Way as silent ambassadors from Earth — perhaps forever. Each spacecraft carries a Golden Record of Earth sounds, pictures, and messages. 10. Beyond the Voyagers: Next steps for exploring interstellar space There are no current NASA plans to send new spacecraft to interstellar space, but researchers are exploring a variety of ideas and concepts for what might be possible and scientifically valuable. There are, however, two NASA satellites designed to study interstellar space from relatively close to Earth. The Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) is a small satellite already orbiting Earth. IBEX has special instruments gathering data to create the first map of the boundary of interstellar space. NASA is preparing to launch the Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration Probe (IMAP) in 2025. The spacecraft will be positioned about 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) away from Earth toward the Sun, at what is called the first Lagrange point or L1. It will help researchers better understand the boundary of the heliosphere. Share Details Last Updated May 13, 2025 Related Terms The Solar System The Universe Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Voyager Program Explore More 2 min read NASA’s Hubble Seeks Lensed Supernova, Marks 200,000 Orbits Article 4 days ago 3 min read Embracing the Equinox Article 5 days ago 5 min read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars When NASA’s Perseverance rover reached the inner edge of Mars’ Jezero Crater in September 2023,… Article 6 days ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Facts About Earth Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

8 min read 10 Things: What’s That Space Rock? NASA Science Editorial Team Jul 21, 2022 Article Contents 1. Asteroids 2. Comets 3. Meteoroids 4. Meteors 5. Meteor Showers 6. Meteorites 7. Dwarf Planets 8. Kuiper Belt Objects 9. Oort Cloud Objects 10. The Explorers NASA's Galileo spacecraft captured this view in August 1993, minutes before its closest approach to asteroid 243 Ida and its tiny moon, Dactyl. NASA/JPL Asteroids, comets, meteors, and meteorites. What are they, and how can we tell them apart? The path through the solar system is a rocky road. Asteroids, comets, Kuiper Belt Objects – all kinds of small bodies of rock, metal, and ice are in constant motion as they orbit the Sun. But what’s the difference between them, anyway? And why do these miniature worlds fascinate space explorers so much? The answer is profound: They may hold the keys to a better understanding of where we all come from. On Feb. 14, 2000, at 10:33 a.m. EST, NASA's NEAR spacecraft was successfully inserted into orbit around 433 Eros, becoming the first artificial satellite of an asteroid. Just over an hour later, NEAR pointed its camera at the asteroid and took this picture from a range of 210 miles (330 km) above the surface. NASA/JPL/JHUAPL 1. Asteroids Asteroids are rocky, airless worlds that orbit our Sun. They are remnants left over from the formation of our solar system, ranging in size from the length of a car to about as wide as a large city. Asteroids are diverse in composition; some are metallic while others are rich in carbon, giving them a coal-black color. They can be “rubble piles,” loosely held together by their own gravity, or they can be solid rocks. Most of the asteroids in our solar system reside in a region called the main asteroid belt. This vast, doughnut-shaped ring between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter contains hundreds of thousands of asteroids, maybe millions. But despite what you see in the movies, there is still a great deal of space between each asteroid. Other asteroids (and comets) follow different orbits, including some that enter Earth’s neighborhood. These are called near-Earth objects, or NEOs. We track the ones we have discovered, and predict where they are headed. The Minor Planet Center (MPC) and Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Center for Near Earth Object Studies (CNEOS) do that very thing. Telescopes around the world and in space are used to spot new asteroids and comets. The MPC and CNEOS, along with International colleagues, calculate where those asteroids and comets are going and determine whether they might pose an impact threat to Earth. For scientists, asteroids play the role of time capsules from the early solar system, having been preserved in the vacuum of space for billions of years. What’s more, the main asteroid belt may have been a source of water – and organic compounds critical to life – for the inner planets like Earth. Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko as seen by ESA's Rosetta spacecraft on Sept. 29, 2016, when Rosetta was at an altitude of 14 miles (23 kilometers). The Rosetta mission ended the next day with a controlled touchdown of the spacecraft on the comet. ESA/Rosetta/MPS for OSIRIS Team MPS/UPD/LAM/IAA/SSO/INTA/UPM/DASP/IDA 2. Comets Comets also orbit the Sun, but they are more like snowballs than space rocks. Each comet has a center called a nucleus that contains icy chunks of frozen gases, along with bits of rock and dust. When a comet’s orbit brings it close to the Sun, the comet heats up and spews dust and gases, forming a giant, glowing ball called a coma around its nucleus, along with two tails – one made of dust and the other of excited gas (ions). Driven by a constant flow of particles from the Sun called the solar wind, the tails point away from the Sun, sometimes stretching for millions of miles. While there are likely billions of comets in the solar system, the current confirmed number is about 3,910 . Like asteroids, comets are made of material left over from the formation of our solar system around 4.6 billion years ago, and they preserve secrets from the earliest days of the Sun’s family. Some of Earth’s water and other chemical constituents could have been delivered by comet impacts. An artist re-creation of a collision in deep space. NASA/JPL-Caltech 3. Meteoroids Meteoroids are fragments and debris in space resulting from collisions among asteroids, comets, moons, and planets. They are among the smallest “space rocks.” We can see them when they streak through our atmosphere in the form of meteors and meteor showers. This photograph, taken by an astronaut aboard the International Space Station, provides the unusual perspective of looking down on a meteor as it passes through Earth's atmosphere. The image was taken on Aug. 13, 2011, during the Perseid Meteor Shower that occurs every August. NASA 4. Meteors Meteors are meteoroids that fall through Earth’s atmosphere at extremely high speeds. The pressure and heat they generate as they push through the air causes them to glow and create streaks of light in the sky. Most burn up completely before touching the ground. We often refer to them as “shooting stars.” Meteors may be made mostly of rock, metal, or a combination of the two. Scientists estimate that about 48.5 tons (44,000 kilograms) of meteoritic material falls on Earth each day. The constellation Orion is framed by two meteors during the Perseid shower on Aug. 12, 2018, in Cedar Breaks National Monument, Utah. NASA/Bill Dunford 5. Meteor Showers Meteors can usually be seen on any clear night throughout the year. Sometimes the number increases dramatically – these events are termed meteor showers. They occur when Earth passes through trails of particles left by comets. When the particles enter Earth’s atmosphere, they burn up, creating hundreds or even thousands of bright streaks in the sky. We can easily plan when to watch meteor showers because numerous showers happen annually as Earth’s orbit takes it through the same patches of comet debris. An SUV-sized asteroid, 2008TC#, impacted Earth on Oct. 7, 2008, in the Nubian Desert, Northern Sudan. Dr. Peter Jenniskens, NASA/SETI, joined Muawia Shaddas of the University of Khartoum in leading an expedition to search for samples. NASA/SETI/P. Jenniskens 6. Meteorites Meteorites are fragments of asteroids, comets, moons, and planets that survive the heated journey through Earth’s atmosphere all the way to the ground. Most meteorites found on Earth are pebble to fist size, but some are larger than a building. Early Earth experienced many large meteorite impacts that caused extensive destruction. Well-documented stories of modern meteorite-caused injury or death are rare. In the first known case of an extraterrestrial object to have injured a human being in the U.S., Ann Hodges of Sylacauga, Alabama, was severely bruised by an 8-pound (3.6-kilogram) stony meteorite that crashed through her roof in November 1954. The largest object in the asteroid belt is actually a dwarf planet called Ceres. This view comes from NASA’s Dawn mission. The color is approximately as it would appear to the eye. NASA/JPL-Caltech/UCLA/MPS/DLR/IDA 7. Dwarf Planets Don’t let the name fool you; despite their small size, dwarf planets are worlds that are just as compelling as their larger siblings. Dwarf planets are defined by astronomers as bodies massive enough to be shaped by gravity into a round or nearly round shape, but they don’t have enough of their own gravitational muscle to clear their path of other objects as they orbit the Sun. In our solar system, dwarf planets are mostly found in the Kuiper Belt beyond Neptune; Pluto is the best-known example. But the largest object in the asteroid belt is the dwarf planet Ceres . Like Pluto, Ceres shows signs of active geology, including ice volcanoes. The small Kuiper Belt object officially known as Arrokoth is the most distant and most primitive object ever explored by a spacecraft. NASA's New Horizons spacecraft flew by Arrokoth on Jan. 1, 2019, snapping images that showed a double-lobed object that looked like a partially flattened snowman. NASA/Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory/Southwest Research Institute/Roman Tkachenko 8. Kuiper Belt Objects The Kuiper Belt is a disc-shaped region beyond Neptune that extends from about 30 to 55 astronomical units – that is, 30 to 55 times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. There may be hundreds of thousands of icy bodies and a trillion or more comets in this distant region of our solar system. Besides Pluto, some of the mysterious worlds of the Kuiper Belt include dwarf planets Makemake , Haumea , and Eris . Like asteroids and comets, Kuiper Belt objects are time capsules, perhaps kept even more pristine in their icy realm. This chart puts solar system distances in perspective. The scale bar is in astronomical units (AU), with each set distance beyond 1 AU representing 10 times the previous distance. One AU is the distance from the Sun to the Earth, which is about 93 million miles or 150 million kilometers. Neptune, the most distant planet from the Sun, is about 30 AU. NASA/JPL-Caltech 9. Oort Cloud Objects The Oort Cloud is a group of icy bodies beginning roughly 186 billion miles (300 billion kilometers) away from the Sun. While the planets of our solar system orbit in a flat plane, the Oort Cloud is believed to be a giant spherical shell surrounding the Sun, planets, and Kuiper Belt Objects. It is like a big, thick bubble around our solar system. The Oort Cloud’s icy bodies can be as large as mountains, and sometimes larger. This dark, cold expanse is by far the solar system’s largest and most distant region. It extends all the way to about 100,000 AU (100,000 times the distance between Earth and the Sun) – a good portion of the way to the next star system. Comets from the Oort Cloud can have orbital periods of thousands or even millions of years. Consider this: At its current speed of about a million miles a day, NASA’s Voyager 1 spacecraft won’t reach the Oort Cloud for more than 300 years. It will then take about 30,000 years for the spacecraft to traverse the Oort Cloud, and exit our solar system entirely. This mosaic image of asteroid Bennu is composed of 12 PolyCam images collected on Dec. 2, 2018, by the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft from a range of 15 miles (24 km). NASA/Goddard/University of Arizona 10. The Explorers Fortunately, even though the Oort Cloud is extremely distant, most of the small bodies we’ve been discussing are much closer. In fact, NASA and other space agencies have robotic spacecraft exploring some of these small worlds up close. Our mechanical emissaries act as our eyes and hands in deep space, searching for whatever clues these time capsules hold. A partial roster of current or recent missions to small, rocky destinations includes, from NASA: OSIRIS-REx – Delivered a sample of asteroid Bennu to Earth on Sept. 24, 2023. New Horizons – On Jan. 1, 2019, the spacecraft flew by the small Kuiper Belt object officially known as Arrokoth – or by its original designation (486958) 2014 MU69 – the most distant and most primitive object ever explored by a spacecraft. Images showed a double-lobed object that looked like a partially flattened snowman. The spacecraft continues to explore the outer solar system . Psyche – The spacecraft is on its way to a metallic asteroid with the same name, which may be the core of a planet that was destroyed long ago. Lucy – Lucy was launched on Oct 16, 2021, on the first space mission to explore a population of small bodies known as the Trojans. The Trojans are outer solar system asteroids that orbit the Sun “in front of” and “behind” the gas giant Jupiter, at the same distance from the Sun as Jupiter. Dawn – Dawn launched in 2007 and visited two-time capsules of the solar system – asteroid Vesta and dwarf planet Ceres, the largest bodies of the main asteroid belt. Plus these missions from other space agencies: The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA)’s Hayabusa2 – The spacecraft studied asteroid Ryugu, collected samples, and brought them to Earth for analysis. The spacecraft is on an extended mission to asteroid 1998 KY26. The European Space Agency (ESA)’s Rosetta – Orbited the comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko and dispatched a lander to its surface. Share Details Last Updated Nov 05, 2024 Related Terms The Solar System Asteroids Comets Meteors & Meteorites The Kuiper Belt Explore More 3 min read Embracing the Equinox Article 5 days ago 5 min read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars When NASA’s Perseverance rover reached the inner edge of Mars’ Jezero Crater in September 2023,… Article 6 days ago 6 min read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Article 1 week ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Facts About Earth Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

4 min read 10 Things: Our Solar System’s Most Marvelous Moons NASA Science Editorial Team May 01, 2017 Article Contents 1. Europa: Ocean World 2. Weird Weather: Titan 3. Icy Giant: Ganymede 4. Retrograde Rebel: Triton 5. Cold Faithful: Enceladus 6. Volcano World: Io 7. A Double World: Charon and Pluto 8. "Death Star" Moon: Mimas 9. Don't Be Afraid, It's Just Phobos 10. The Moon We Know Best Our solar system is a jewel box filled with a glittering variety of beautiful worlds—and not all of them are planets. We present 10 of our solar system's most marvelous moons. 1. Europa: Ocean World The puzzling, fascinating surface of Jupiter's icy moon Europa looms large in this image created from images taken by NASA's Galileo spacecraft in the late 1990s. NASA/JPL-Caltech/SETI Institute Europa may be one of the most promising places in our solar system to find present-day environments suitable for some form of life beyond Earth. Scientists believe a saltwater ocean lies beneath its icy shell, holding twice as much water as Earth's global ocean. It also may have the chemical elements that are key ingredients to life. NASA launched Europa Clipper on Oct. 14, 2024, to determine whether there are places below Europa's surface that could support life. 2. Weird Weather: Titan Titan's hydrocarbon lakes are visible through the haze in this image from NASA's Cassini spacecraft. NASA/JPL-Caltech Saturn's hazy moon Titan is larger than Mercury, but its size is not the only way it's like a planet. Titan has a thick atmosphere, complete with its own "water cycle" — except that it's way too cold on Titan for liquid water. Instead, rains of liquid hydrocarbons like ethane and methane fall onto icy mountains, run into rivers, and gather into great seas. NASA's Cassini spacecraft mapped the methane seas with radar, and its cameras even caught a glimpse of sunlight reflecting off the seas' surface. 3. Icy Giant: Ganymede This image of Ganymede was taken by the JunoCam imager aboard NASA's Juno spacecraft during its June 7, 2021, flyby of Jupiter's largest moon. At the time of closest approach, Juno was within 645 miles (1,038 kilometers) of its surface – closer to Ganymede than any other spacecraft has come in more than two decades. NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI/MSSS Jupiter's moon Ganymede is the largest moon in the solar system. It's bigger than planet Mercury and dwarf planet Pluto, and it's about three-quarters the size of Mars. It's also the only moon known to have its own magnetic field. 4. Retrograde Rebel: Triton Neptune's moon Triton. NASA Triton is Neptune's largest moon, and the only sizable moon in the solar system to orbit in the opposite direction of its planet's rotation, a retrograde orbit. It may have been captured from the Kuiper Belt, where Pluto orbits. Despite the frigid temperatures there, Triton has cryovolcanic activity -- frozen nitrogen sometimes sublimates directly to gas and erupts from geysers on the surface. 5. Cold Faithful: Enceladus Saturn's moon Enceladus hides an ocean of liquid water beneath its icy shell. NASA The most famous geysers in our solar system outside of Earth belong to Saturn's active moon Enceladus. It's a small, icy body, but Cassini revealed this world to be one of the solar system's most scientifically interesting destinations. Geyser-like jets spew water vapor and ice particles from an underground ocean beneath the icy crust of Enceladus. With its global ocean, unique chemistry and internal heat, Enceladus has become a promising lead in our search for worlds where life could exist. 6. Volcano World: Io Jupiter's volcanic moon Io. NASA Jupiter's moon Io is subjected to tremendous gravitational forces that cause its surface to bulge up and down by as much as 330 feet (100 m). The result? Io is the most volcanically active body in the solar system, with hundreds of volcanoes, some erupting lava fountains dozens of miles high. 7. A Double World: Charon and Pluto A composite of enhanced color images of Pluto (lower right) and Charon (upper left), taken by NASA's New Horizons spacecraft as it passed through the Pluto system on July 14, 2015. NASA At half the size of Pluto, Charon is the largest of Pluto's moons and the largest known satellite relative to its parent body. The moon is so big compared to Pluto that Pluto and Charon are sometimes referred to as a double planet system. Charon's orbit around Pluto takes 6.4 Earth days, and one Pluto rotation (a Pluto day) takes 6.4 Earth days. So from Pluto's point of view Charon neither rises nor sets, but hovers over the same spot on Pluto's surface, and the same side of Charon always faces Pluto. 8. "Death Star" Moon: Mimas Mimas' gigantic crater Herschel lies near the moon's limb in this view from NASA's Cassini spacecraft. NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute Saturn's moon Mimas has one feature that draws more attention than any other: The crater Herschel. The crater formed in an impact that nearly shattered the little world. Herschel gives Mimas a distinctive look that often prompts "Star Wars" jokes. But, yes, in this case - it is a moon, and not the Death Star. 9. Don't Be Afraid, It's Just Phobos The High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) camera on NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter took this image of Phobos - the larger of Mars' two moons - on March 23, 2008. NASA/JPL-Caltech/University of Arizona Mars was the god of war, so it's fitting that its two small moons are called Phobos , "fear," and Deimos, "terror." NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter caught this look at Phobos, which is roughly 17 miles (27 km) wide. Phobos is on a collision course with Mars. It's nearing Mars at a rate of six feet (1.8 meters) every hundred years. At that rate, the moon will either crash into Mars in 50 million years or break up into a ring. 10. The Moon We Know Best On June 10th, 2011, the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) captured this striking image of the Tycho crater. The crater is in the southern lunar highlands and is approximately 82km in diameter. The crater’s notable feature is how steep it is which is due to the fact is a relatively young crater (110 million years old). NASA Although decades have passed since astronauts last set foot on its surface, Earth's Moon is far from abandoned. Several robotic missions have continued the exploration. For example, this stunning view of the Moon's famous Tycho crater was captured by NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, which continues to map the surface in fine detail today. Share Details Last Updated Mar 06, 2025 Related Terms Moons The Solar System Explore More 3 min read Embracing the Equinox Article 5 days ago 5 min read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars When NASA’s Perseverance rover reached the inner edge of Mars’ Jezero Crater in September 2023,… Article 6 days ago 6 min read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Article 1 week ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Facts About Earth Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

6 min read 10 Things: Greatest Hits – Craters We Love NASA Science Editorial Team Oct 05, 2022 Article Contents 1. Mercury: A Basin Bigger Than Texas 2. Venus: Tough on Space Rocks 3. Earth: Still Craters After All These Years 4. Moon: Our Cratered Companion 5. Mars: Still Taking Hits 6. Ceres: What Lies Beneath 7. Comet Tempel 1: We Did It! 8. Mimas: May the 4th Be With You 9. Europa: Say What? 10. Show Us Your Greatest Hits With a diameter of 5.6 miles (9 kilometers), Stickney Crater is the most prominent feature on Mars' moon Phobos. NASA/JPL-Caltech/University of Arizona Our solar system was built on impacts: Some big, some small – some fast, some slow. Here’s a short list through some of the more intriguing impacts across our solar system. Enhanced-color view of Mercury's Caloris Basin. NASA/Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory/Carnegie Institution of Washington 1. Mercury: A Basin Bigger Than Texas Mercury does not have a thick atmosphere to protect it from space debris. The small planet is riddled with craters, but none as spectacular as the Caloris Basin. “Basin” is what geologists call craters larger than about 186 miles (300 kilometers) in diameter. Caloris is about 950 miles (1,525 kilometers) across and is ringed by mile-high mountains. For scale, the state of Texas is 773 miles (1,244 kilometers) wide from east to west. Margaret Mead Crater on Venus. NASA/JPL-Caltech 2. Venus: Tough on Space Rocks Venus’ ultra-thick atmosphere finishes off most meteors before they reach the surface. The planet’s volcanic history has erased many of its craters, but like almost any place with solid ground in our solar system, there are still impact scars to be found. Most of what we know of Venus’ craters comes from radar images provided by orbiting spacecraft, such as NASA’s Magellan. Mead Crater is the largest known impact site on Venus. It is about 170 miles (275 kilometers) in diameter. The relatively-flat, brighter inner floor of the crater indicates it was filled with impact melt and/or lava. 3. Earth: Still Craters After All These Years Evidence of really big impacts – such as Arizona’s Meteor Crater – is harder to find on Earth. The impact history of our home world has largely been erased by weather and water or buried under lava, rock, or ice. Nonetheless, we still find new giant craters occasionally. In 2019, a NASA glaciologist discovered a possible impact crater buried under more than a mile of ice in northwest Greenland . That followed the finding, announced in November 2018, of a 19-mile-wide crater beneath Hiawatha Glacier – the first meteorite impact crater ever discovered under Earth’s ice sheets. Though these impact sites in northwest Greenland are only 114 miles apart, at present they do not appear to have formed at the same time. If the second crater, which has a width of over 22 miles, is ultimately confirmed as the result of a meteorite impact, it will be the 22nd largest impact crater found on Earth. "We’ve surveyed the Earth in many different ways, from land, air, and space – it’s exciting that discoveries like these are still possible," said Joe MacGregor, a glaciologist with NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, who participated in both findings. Tycho Crater's central peak on the Moon. NASA Goddard/Arizona State University 4. Moon: Our Cratered Companion Want to imagine what Earth might look like without its protective atmosphere, weather, water, and other crater-erasing features? Look up at the Moon. Tycho Crater on the Moon. NASA/Goddard/Arizona State University The Moon’s pockmarked face offers what may be humanity’s most familiar view of impact craters. One of the easiest to spot is Tycho, the tight circle and bright, radiating splat are easy slightly off center on the lower-left side of the full moon. Closer views of the 53-mile (85-kilometer)-wide crater from orbiting spacecraft reveal a beautiful central peak, topped with an intriguing boulder that would fill about half of a typical city block. A new impact on Mars as seen from orbit. NASA/JPL-Caltech/University of Arizona 5. Mars: Still Taking Hits Mars has just enough atmosphere to ensure nail-biting spacecraft landings, but not enough to prevent regular hits from falling space rocks. This dark splat on the Martian south pole formed between July and September 2018. The two-toned blast pattern tells a geologic story. The larger, lighter-colored blast pattern could be the result of scouring by winds from the impact shockwave on ice. The darker-colored inner blast pattern is because the impactor penetrated the thin ice layer, blasting the dark sand underneath in all directions. Simulated view of Occator Crater revealing the crater's unique features. NASA/JPL-Caltech/UCLA/MPS/DLR/IDA 6. Ceres: What Lies Beneath The bright spots in Ceres’ Occator crater intrigued the world from the moment the approaching Dawn spacecraft first photographed it in 2015. Closer inspection from orbit revealed the spots to be the most visible example of hundreds of bright, salty deposits that decorate the dwarf planet like a smattering of diamonds. The science behind these bright spots is even more compelling: they are mainly sodium carbonate and ammonium chloride that somehow made their way to the surface in a slushy brine from within or below the crust. Thanks to Dawn, scientists have a better sense of how these reflective areas formed and changed over time – processes indicative of an active, evolving world. 7. Comet Tempel 1: We Did It! Scientists have long known we can learn a lot from impact craters – so, in 2005, they made one themselves and watched it happen. On July 4, 2005, NASA’s Deep Impact spacecraft trained its instruments on an 816-pound (370-kilogram) copper impactor as it smashed into comet Tempel 1. One of the more surprising findings: The comet has a loose, “fluffy” structure, held together by gravity, and contains a surprising amount of organic compounds that are part of the basic building blocks of life. Herschel Crater on Saturn's moon Mimas. NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute 8. Mimas: May the 4th Be With You Few "Star Wars fans – us included – can resist Obi-Wan Kenobi's memorable line “That’s no moon…” when images of Saturn’s moon Mimas pop up on a screen. Despite its Death Star-like appearance, Mimas is most definitely a moon – our Cassini spacecraft checked – and the super laser-looking depression is simply an 81-mile (130-kilometer) wide crater named for the moon’s discoverer, William Herschel. Pwyll Crater on Europa. NASA/JPL/University of Arizona 9. Europa: Say What? The Welsh name of this crater on Jupiter’s ocean moon Europa looks like a tongue-twister, but it is perhaps easiest pronounced as “pool.” Pwyll is thought to be one of the youngest features we know of on Europa. The bright splat from the impact extends more than 600 miles (about 1,000 kilometers) around the crater, a fresh blanket over rugged, older terrain. “Fresh,” or young, is a relative term in geology; the crater and its rays are likely millions of years old. Saturn's moon Hyperion. NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute 10. Show Us Your Greatest Hits Got a passion for Stickney, the dominant bowl-shaped crater on one end of Mars’ moon Phobos? Or a fondness for the sponge-like abundance of impacts on Saturn’s battered moon Hyperion (pictured)? There are countless craters to choose from. Share your favorites with us on Twitter , Instagram and Facebook . Share Details Last Updated Sep 21, 2026 Related Terms The Solar System Explore More 3 min read Embracing the Equinox Article 5 days ago 5 min read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars When NASA’s Perseverance rover reached the inner edge of Mars’ Jezero Crater in September 2023,… Article 6 days ago 6 min read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Article 1 week ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Facts About Earth Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Asteroid and Comet Resources Explore this page for a curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, handouts, and online interactives. This resource package is suitable for educators, students, and anyone interested in learning more about asteroids and comets! Discover Asteroids and Comets In addition to the resources on this page, follow along with updates on asteroids and comets and current missions through @NASASolarSystem on your preferred social media platform. Asteroid Animations and Videos Asteroid Images Comet Animations and Videos Comet Images Activities and Tactiles Handouts Online Interactives NASA asteroids main page Asteroids Learn more about asteroids which are rocky, airless remnants left over from the early formation of our solar system about 4.6 billion years ago. Explore This mosaic blends some of the best views NASA's Dawn spacecraft took of the giant asteroid Vesta. Dawn studied Vesta from July 2011 to September 2012. NASA/JPL-Caltech/UCLA/MPS/DLR/IDA Asteroid Animations and Videos Psyche Swings By Mars for Crucial Maneuver On May 15, 2026, NASA's Psyche spacecraft got a boost from Mars, flying close to the Red Planet to harness its gravitational pull. Watch DART: Double Asteroid Redirection Test NASA's DART (Double Asteroid Redirection Test) was a groundbreaking planetary defense experiment designed to test if we could actually "nudge" an asteroid off course. Watch Planetary Defenders (NASA+ Original) How would humanity respond if we discovered an asteroid headed for Earth? NASA's Planetary Defenders is a gripping documentary that delves into the high-stakes world of asteroid detection and planetary defense. Watch NASA Finds Ingredients of Life in Fragments of Lost World Discover how rocks from asteroid Bennu are revealing a lost world from the dawn of the solar system, with the right conditions to foster the building blocks of life. Watch NASA's Lucy Mission Will Explore Asteroid Donaldjohanson Along the way to the Jupiter Trojans, the Lucy spacecraft is traveling through the main asteroid belt, on course to fly past 52246 Donaldjohanson on April 20, 2025. Watch What You Need To Know About Asteroids and Other Near-Earth Objects Learn how we find, track, and monitor near-Earth objects. Watch To an Asteroid and Back Follow along with NASA's OSIRIS-REx team as they launch a spacecraft to an asteroid, collect a sample of asteroid Bennu, and bring it home to Earth. Watch Why Did NASA Choose Asteroid Bennu? Learn about NASA's selection process for choosing the near-Earth asteroid Bennu as the target for the agency's OSIRIS-REx mission. Watch NASA's Psyche Mission to an Asteroid: Official NASA Trailer Journey along with NASA's Psyche mission to explore a unique metallic asteroid orbiting the Sun between Mars and Jupiter. Watch Meet NASA's Psyche Team Who Will Measure the Asteroid's Magnetic Field Discover how NASA's Psyche team will measure asteroid 16 Psyche's magnetic field using a magnetometer. Watch Lucy's Journey Meet Lucy as she prepares for the first ever journey to the Trojan asteroids. Watch Lucy Sees Asteroid Dinkinesh in Detail Explore the main-belt asteroid Dinkinesh through the eyes of the Lucy spacecraft. Watch Analyzing Samples of an Asteroid Zooming in on Bennu samples A top-down view of one of the containers holding rocks and dust from asteroid Bennu, with hardware scale marked in centimeters. This image was captured using manual high-resolution precision photography and a semi-automated focus stacking procedure. The result is a sample image that can be zoomed in on to show extreme detail. Browse More Asteroid Images Analyzing Samples of an Asteroid NASA comets main page Comets Learn more about comets, frozen leftovers from the formation of the solar system, which are composed of dust, rock, and ices. Explore A unique composite Hubble Space Telescope image of Comet Siding Spring as it made its never-before-seen close passage of a comet by Mars in October 2014. NASA, ESA, J.-Y. Li (PSI), C.M. Lisse (JHU/APL), and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA) Comet Animations and Videos Interstellar Visitor is Fastest Comet Ever Recorded NASA's Hubble Space Telescope captured an image of interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS racing through our solar system at 130,000 mph! Discover what this ancient visitor reveals about our galaxy's history. Watch What We Know About Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS The NASA-funded ATLAS (Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System) survey telescope in Rio Hurtado, Chile, first reported observations of comet 3I/ATLAS on July 1, 2025. Learn more about this fast-moving interstellar object and how scientists are studying it as it travels through our solar system. Watch Decoding the History of the Solar System with the Rosetta Mission Join Dr. Kathy Mandt, Lab Chief for the Planetary Systems Laboratory at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, as she shares her experience working on the European Space Agency's Rosetta mission as well as some science results that have been provided by the mission. Watch Volunteers Help Discover 5,000 Comets The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), a joint mission of ESA (European Space Agency) and NASA, discovered its 5,000th comet in March 2024, thanks to the help of volunteer comet hunters participating in the NASA-funded Sungrazer Project. Watch Observing Comet Siding Spring at Mars Learn more about Comet Siding Spring's close encounter with Mars in October 2014. Watch The Lasting Impacts of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 Explore Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9's encounter with Jupiter. Watch Deep Impact: Approach and Impact On July 4, 2005, a probe was released from NASA's Deep Impact spacecraft, which captured images of Comet Tempel 1 before, during and after its collision with the probe. Watch Stardust Swoops by Tempel 1 Discover what it was like for NASA's Stardust spacecraft to fly by Comet Tempel 1. Watch Stardust: Why Bring a Comet Home? Learn about NASA's Stardust mission which captured and delivered samples of a comet to Earth in 2006. Watch Comet 3I/ATLAS NASA missions are working together to track and study this rare, interstellar comet as it passes through our solar system. Learn More This image of interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS was captured by the Hubble Space Telescope's Wide Field Camera on July 21, 2025. Image: NASA, ESA, David Jewitt (UCLA); Image Processing: Joseph DePasquale (STScI) Comet ISON A unique Hubble view of Comet ISON In this Hubble Space Telescope composite image taken in April 2013, the Sun-approaching Comet ISON floats against a seemingly infinite backdrop of numerous galaxies and a handful of foreground stars. The icy visitor, with its long gossamer tail, appears to be swimming like a tadpole through a deep pond of celestial wonders. Image credit: NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA) Browse More Comet Images Comet ISON Planetary Defense Explore NASA's ongoing mission of finding, tracking, and better understanding asteroids and comets that could pose an impact hazard to Earth. Learn More about Planetary Defense Activities and Tactiles Citizen Science Projects Rubin Comet Catchers Help scientists identify rare objects like water-bearing comets and asteroids in images from the Vera C. Rubin Observatory. Finding such objects gives us clues about the origin of water and life on Earth. Explore Exoasteroids We call asteroids that orbit stars other than the Sun "exoasteroids". Join our search for exoasteroids around white dwarfs, planet-sized objects that represent the final evolutionary stage of Sun-like stars! Explore The Daily Minor Planet Using data from the Catalina Sky Survey, look for asteroids and help spot potential Earth impactors. Explore Exploring with the Psyche Mission Discover the Psyche mission to an asteroid with these activities and models. Explore Make Your Own Asteroid Make your own model asteroid at home using a variety of materials. Explore Down to the Core This PBS Kids activity uses a potato to test how to take a core sample. Explore OSIRIS-REx Coloring Pages Color illustrations of the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft exploring asteroid Bennu and returning to Earth with a precious asteroid sample. Explore Make a Comet on a Stick! A comet is a chunk of ice, rock, and gas flying through space. When they get close to the Sun, they heat up. We can then see their long tails glow. In this activity, you'll make your own comet that can fly around the room! Explore Create a Comet with Dry Ice Learn how to build an icy model of a comet, complete with shooting jets. This activity provides an opportunity for students to make observations, discuss changing states of matter and demonstrate measuring skills. Explore 3D Models: Asteroid Bennu Download the files to print your own 3D models of Bennu. Explore 3D Models: Apophis Download the data to print your own 3D model of near-Earth asteroid Apophis. Explore Handouts Asteroids Poster – Version A This view of the asteroid 243 Ida was acquired by NASA's Galileo spacecraft on Aug. 28, 1993, about 3-1/2 minutes before the spacecraft made its closest approach to Ida. Download Asteroids Poster – Version B NASA's Dawn spacecraft obtained this image of the large asteroid Vesta in 2012, looking down at Vesta's north pole as the spacecraft was departing. Download Comets Poster – Version A A mosaic comprising four individual images of Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko from the European Space Agency's Rosetta mission in November 2014. Download Comets Poster – Version B A view of Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko based on two images acquired by the European Space Agency's Rosetta mission. Download Comets Poster – Version C A section of the smaller of Comet 67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko’s two lobes as seen by the European Space Agency's Rosetta mission in October 2014. Download OSIRIS-REx Mission Posters Download OSIRIS-REx posters and collectibles from the University of Arizona. Download Lucy Mission Posters Download Lucy posters and collectibles from the Southwest Research Institute. Download Online Interactives NASA's Eyes on Asteroids Fully interactive, NASA's Eyes on Asteroids uses data to visualize asteroid and comet orbits around the Sun. Explore More NASA Solar System Treks: Bennu Check out these online portals and explore the surfaces of other worlds using real data returned from spacecraft. Visit Bennu now! Explore More NASA Solar System Treks: Vesta Check out these online portals and explore the surfaces of other worlds using real data returned from spacecraft. Visit Vesta now! Explore More NASA Solar System Treks: Ryugu Check out these online portals and explore the surfaces of other worlds using real data returned from spacecraft. Visit Ryugu now! Explore More Asteroid Watch Dashboard Track the next five asteroids making the closest passes by Earth. Explore More NASA Small-Body Database Look up the details about user-specified asteroids and comets. Explore More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Meteor Showers Psyche Psyche is heading to a metal-rich asteroid with the same name and will begin exploring in 2029. 2024 YR4 Apophis

Explore This Section Lucy Mission Resources Explore this page for a curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos, animations, handouts, and online interactives. This resource package is suitable for educators, students, and anyone interested in learning more about NASA's Lucy mission! Join the Mission In addition to the resources on this page, follow the progress of the Lucy mission at #LucyMission and @NASASolarSystem on your preferred social media platform, and read more on the NASA Lucy Mission Blog . Highlights Mission Animations and Videos Activities Handouts Online Interactives Mission home page Lucy Learn more about the Lucy mission and its journey to the Jupiter Trojan asteroids, a population of primitive small bodies orbiting in tandem with Jupiter. Explore An illustration of the Lucy spacecraft flying by two of its asteroid targets. NASA/GSFC Highlights Flyby of Asteroid Donaldjohanson Earth Gravity Assist #2 First Asteroid Flyby Earth Gravity Assist #1 Launch Flyby of Asteroid Donaldjohanson NASA's Lucy spacecraft completed its flyby of asteroid Donaldjohanson on April 20, 2025, with its closest approach occurring at 1:51 p.m. EDT. From a preliminary analysis of the first available images collected by the spacecraft's L'LORRI imager, the asteroid appears to be larger than originally estimated, about 5 miles (8 km) long and 2 miles (3.5 km) wide at the widest point. In this first set of high-resolution images returned from the spacecraft, the full asteroid is not visible as the asteroid is larger than the imager's field of view. The Lucy team is currently poring over the data from the encounter; this dataset will give a more complete picture of the asteroid's overall shape. Scientists are analyzing the data to better understand the relatively young asteroid and to ensure that the spacecraft and team are well prepared to observe the mission's main targets: the Jupiter Trojan asteroids, beginning in 2027. Read More The asteroid Donaldjohanson as seen by the Lucy Long-Range Reconnaissance Imager (L’LORRI) on NASA’s Lucy spacecraft during its flyby. This timelapse shows images captured approximately every 2 seconds beginning at 1:50 p.m. EDT April 20, 2025. The asteroid rotates very slowly; the apparent rotation is due to the spacecraft’s motion as it flies by Donaldjohanson at a distance of 1,000 to 660 miles (1,600 to 1,100 km). The spacecraft’s closest approach distance was 600 miles (960 km), but the images shown were taken approximately 40 seconds beforehand, the nearest ones at a distance of 660 miles (1100 km). NASA/Goddard/SwRI/Johns Hopkins APL Second Earth Gravity Assist On Dec. 12, 2024, at 11:15 p.m. EST, NASA's Lucy spacecraft, currently in a two-year orbit around the Sun, skimmed Earth's atmosphere, passing only about 220 miles (360 kilometers) above the surface. This close flyby resulted in a "gravity assist," putting the spacecraft on a new trajectory that travels through the main asteroid belt and out to the never-before-explored Jupiter Trojan asteroids, small bodies that orbit the Sun at the same distance as Jupiter. Read More This diagram illustrates Lucy's orbital path. The spacecraft's path (green) is shown in a frame of reference where Jupiter remains stationary, giving the trajectory its pretzel-like shape. Southwest Research Institute Dinkinesh: Lucy's First Asteroid Flyby NASA's Lucy spacecraft flew by not just its first asteroid, but its first three, on Nov. 1, 2023. Early images returned by Lucy reveal that the small main belt asteroid Dinkinesh has a contact binary as a satellite (that is, its satellite is made of two smaller objects touching each other). The Lucy team used this encounter as an opportunity to test out spacecraft systems and procedures. Read More This image shows the asteroid Dinkinesh and its satellite as seen by the Lucy Long-Range Reconnaissance Imager (L'LORRI) as NASA's Lucy spacecraft departed the system. This image was taken at 1 p.m. EDT (1700 UTC) Nov. 1, 2023, about 6 minutes after closest approach, from a range of approximately 1,010 miles (1,630 km). From this perspective, the satellite is revealed to be a contact binary, the first time a contact binary has been seen orbiting another asteroid. NASA/GSFC/SwRI/Johns Hopkins APL First Earth Gravity Assist After a year in orbit around the Sun, the Lucy spacecraft returned home on its launch anniversary for the first of three Earth gravity assists. On Oct. 16, 2022, Lucy flew by the Earth like a partner in a swing dance, boosting its speed and elongating its orbit around the Sun. Lucy made its closest approach at just 224 miles (360 km) above Earth: lower than the International Space Station. This close encounter helped Lucy gain more speed so that it can reach its targeted Trojan asteroids. Read More The Lucy spacecraft is shown approaching Earth in this animation still. NASA/GSFC Lucy's Journey Begins Launched on Oct. 16, 2021, Lucy is the first space mission to study the Trojan asteroids. The mission takes its name from the fossilized human ancestor (called "Lucy" by her discoverers) whose skeleton provided unique insight into humanity's evolution. Likewise, the Lucy mission will revolutionize our knowledge of planetary origins and the formation of the solar system. Read More A United Launch Alliance Atlas V rocket with the Lucy spacecraft aboard is seen in this 2 minute and 30-second exposure photograph as it launches from Space Launch Complex 41, Saturday, Oct. 16, 2021, at Cape Canaveral Space Force Station in Florida. NASA/Bill Ingalls Mission Animations and Videos NASA's Lucy Mission – Main Belt Asteroid Encounters NASA's Lucy mission flew by the Main Belt asteroid Donaldjohanson on April 20, 2025, on its way to its prime mission of exploring the Jupiter Trojan asteroids starting in 2027. Discover what scientists are learning from this flyby and from the spacecraft's journey to the Trojan asteroids. Watch NASA's Lucy Mission Flyby of Asteroid Donaldjohanson Along the way to the Jupiter Trojans, the Lucy spacecraft is traveling through the main asteroid belt, and flew past asteroid Donaldjohanson on April 20, 2025. Watch Lucy Spacecraft's Second Slingshot of Earth NASA's Lucy mission is heading to the Jupiter Trojans, two swarms of asteroids trapped in Jupiter's orbit…but to get there, Lucy needs a little help from the Earth. Watch Lucy Sees Asteroid Dinkinesh in Detail Explore the main-belt asteroid Dinkinesh through the eyes of the Lucy spacecraft. Watch NASA's Lucy Mission Flyby of Asteroid Dinkinesh Learn about the primary purpose of the Lucy mission's encounter with asteroid Dinkinesh. Watch Asteroid Flyby: Dinkinesh The eighth installment of the "Lucy's Journey" series features the mission's first asteroid flyby. Watch Lucy's Journey Meet Lucy as she prepares for the first ever journey to the Trojan asteroids. Watch Exploring the Solar System: Lucy Goes to Space The first episode of the "Lucy Goes to Space" series features Deputy Principal Investigator Cathy Olkin. Watch Lagrange Points: Lucy Goes to Space The second episode of the "Lucy Goes to Space" series features Principal Investigator Hal Levison. Watch Planning for a Spacecraft Launch: Lucy Goes to Space The third episode of the "Lucy Goes to Space" series features Project Manager Donya Douglas-Bradshaw. Watch Driving a Spacecraft: Lucy Goes to Space The fourth episode of the "Lucy Goes to Space" series features Lucy Flight Navigator Coralie Adam. Watch Working on a NASA Mission: Lucy Goes to Space The fifth episode of the "Lucy Goes to Space" series features a variety of team members who discuss their roles on the Lucy mission. Watch Where in the Solar System are the Trojan Asteroids? Lucy is headed to Jupiter's Trojan asteroids, but where exactly are they? Watch NASA Lucy Mission's Message to the Future Discover the special plaque that is onboard the Lucy spacecraft. Watch Lucy Mission Overview Learn more about the Lucy mission to the Trojan asteroids. Watch NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio's Lucy Gallery Explore this gallery for videos and animations relating to the Lucy mission. Explore Featured Story NASA’s Lucy Reveals Wobbling, Peanut-Shaped Asteroid Even small asteroids lead complex lives. During its flyby of the asteroid Donaldjohanson last year, NASA’s Lucy spacecraft revealed the… Read the Story Activities Lucy Mission Activity Book Explore the Lucy mission to the Trojan asteroids with this activity book. Available in both English and Spanish. Explore Meet Lucy Coloring Page Color your very own Lucy spacecraft. Explore #LucyTimeCapsule Create your own #LucyTimeCapsule. Explore Lucy Paper Snowflake Make a Lucy paper snowflake! Explore Handouts A Postcard from Asteroid Donaldjohanson Download a postcard commemorating the Lucy spacecraft's April 20, 2025, encounter with asteroid Donaldjohanson. Download A Postcard from Dinkinesh The Lucy spacecraft sent back a postcard from her first asteroid encounter! This is from her flyby of the asteroid Dinkinesh and its moon, Selam, on November 1, 2023. Download Lucy Mission Posters Download Lucy posters and collectibles from the Southwest Research Institute. Download Online Interactives Follow Along with Lucy Follow Lucy's journey to the Trojan asteroids with NASA's Eyes on the Solar System. Explore More NASA's Eyes on Asteroids Fully interactive, NASA's Eyes on Asteroids uses data to visualize asteroid and comet orbits around the Sun. Explore More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Solar System Resource Packages Donaldjohanson Dinkinesh Asteroids

Explore This Section OSIRIS-REx Resources Explore this page for a curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos, animations, posters, and online interactives. This resource package is suitable for educators, students, and anyone interested in learning more about NASA's OSIRIS-REx (Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification and Security–Regolith Explorer) mission! Join the Mission In addition to the resources on this page, follow updates on OSIRIS-REx at @NASASolarSystem on your preferred social media platform, and read more on the NASA OSIRIS-REx Mission Blog . Highlights Mission Animations and Videos Related Videos Images Activities Additional Resources Mission home page OSIRIS-REx Learn more about the OSIRIS-REx mission and its journey to deliver an asteroid sample to Earth. Explore An illustration of OSIRIS-REx dropping off its sample return capsule at Earth. NASA Highlights Studying the Samples Sample Curation Return to Earth TAG Sample Collection Launch Scientists Study Asteroid Bennu Samples Studies of rock and dust from asteroid Bennu delivered to Earth by NASA's OSIRIS-REx spacecraft have revealed molecules that, on our planet, are key to life, as well as a history of saltwater that could have served as the "broth" for these compounds to interact and combine. The findings do not show evidence for life itself, but they do suggest the conditions necessary for the emergence of life were widespread across the early solar system, increasing the odds life could have formed on other planets and moons. Read More Hannah McLain pipettes inside a fume hood in the Astrobiology Lab at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland on Jan. 27, 2025. Scientists in Goddard’s Astrobiology Lab are studying samples of asteroid Bennu brought to Earth by the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft. NASA/Vivian Renkey Curating the Asteroid Sample One of the goals of the OSIRIS-REx mission was to collect at least 60 grams of asteroid material. The total sample that the spacecraft delivered to Earth was 4.29 ounces (121.6 grams). Curation experts at NASA's Johnson Space Center, working in new clean rooms built especially for the mission, discovered bonus asteroid material covering the outside of the collector head, canister lid, and base. There was so much extra material, it slowed down the careful process of collecting and containing the primary sample. Read More A view of the outside of the OSIRIS-REx sample collector. Sample material from asteroid Bennu can be seen on the middle right. Scientists have found evidence of both carbon and water in initial analysis of this material. The bulk of the sample is located inside. NASA/Erika Blumenfeld & Joseph Aebersold Return to Earth On May 10, 2021, NASA's OSIRIS-REx spacecraft said farewell to asteroid Bennu and began its journey back to Earth with the precious material it collected from the asteroid. The spacecraft successfully delivered the sample of Bennu on Sept. 24, 2023, with its sample return capsule landing at 8:52 a.m. MDT (10:52 a.m. EDT) in a targeted area of the Department of Defense's Utah Test and Training Range near Salt Lake City, Utah. Read More The sample return capsule from NASA's OSIRIS-REx mission is seen shortly after touching down in the desert, Sunday, Sept. 24, 2023, at the Department of Defense's Utah Test and Training Range. The sample was collected from the asteroid Bennu in October 2020 by NASA's OSIRIS-REx spacecraft. NASA/Keegan Barber TAG Sample Collection On Oct. 20, 2020, NASA's OSIRIS-REx spacecraft successfully touched the surface of the near-Earth asteroid Bennu and collected abundant material during the Touch-and-Go (TAG) sample collection event. The sampling event brought the spacecraft all the way down to sample site Nightingale, touching down within 3 feet (1 meter) of the targeted location. Read More OSIRIS-REx touches down in the Nightingale sampling site on asteroid Bennu on Oct. 20, 2020. The sampling head touched Bennu's surface for a few seconds, then the spacecraft performed a back-away burn. NASA/GSFC/University of Arizona Evening Launch for OSIRIS-REx An Atlas V rocket traced a blazing arc into the Florida sky on Sept. 8, 2016, sending a small robotic explorer called OSIRIS-REx on its way to an asteroid. Scientists anticipate the mission will help us to better understand the early solar system, as well as the hazards and resources of near-Earth space. Read More A United Launch Alliance Atlas V rocket lifts off from Space Launch Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station carrying NASA’s Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, Security-Regolith Explorer, or OSIRIS-REx spacecraft, on the first U.S. mission to sample an asteroid, retrieve at least two ounces of surface material and return it to Earth for study. NASA Mission Animations and Videos Bio-Essential Sugars Discovered in Samples from Asteroid Bennu Learn from NASA scientist and OSIRIS-REx Co-Investigator Daniel Glavin as he discusses the discovery of ribose and glucose in samples from asteroid Bennu and the implications for the formation and evolution of life. Watch Explain It Like I'm 5: OSIRIS-REx Life on Earth required a bunch of special ingredients to get started — but where did they come from? That's the big question NASA's OSIRIS-REx mission is helping astrobiologists answer. Watch NASA Finds Ingredients of Life in Fragments of Lost World Discover how rocks from asteroid Bennu are revealing a lost world from the dawn of the solar system, with the right conditions to foster the building blocks of life. Watch To an Asteroid and Back Follow along with NASA's OSIRIS-REx team as they launch a spacecraft to an asteroid, collect a sample of asteroid Bennu, and bring it home to Earth. Watch Why Did NASA Choose Asteroid Bennu? Learn about NASA's selection process for choosing the near-Earth asteroid Bennu as the target for the agency's OSIRIS-REx mission. Watch How NASA Will Study the Asteroid Bennu Samples Learn how the asteroid samples collected by OSIRIS-REx will be curated and made available for scientists around the world to study for decades to come. Watch To Bennu and Back: Journey's End Check out this overview of the OSIRIS-REx mission to deliver an asteroid sample to Earth. Watch OSIRIS-REx Delivers an Asteroid Sample Discover how the OSIRIS-REx sample capsule returned to Earth. Watch Heading Back to Earth OSIRIS-REx completes its mission at asteroid Bennu and starts the journey back to Earth. Watch OSIRIS-REx 'TAGs' Bennu Play-by-play animation of OSIRIS-REx's asteroid sample collection event. Watch Looking for the Building Blocks of Life in Asteroid Samples NASA Goddard research scientist Danielle Simkus discusses the planned laboratory analyses of OSIRIS-REx's collected samples. Watch Tour of Asteroid Bennu This 3D tour of Bennu was created using data and images from the OSIRIS-REx mission. Watch NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio's OSIRIS-REx Gallery Explore this gallery for videos and animations relating to the OSIRIS-REx mission. Explore Related Videos Epic Shot for the NBA and NASA The perfect shot is tough to land, whether it's an NBA 3-pointer or a sample capsule. Watch How We Prepare: OSIRIS-REx and WNBA Discover how an elite athlete and a NASA mission manager prepare for critical moments. Watch Ask an Astrobiologist Scientists explain what asteroid Bennu can teach us about the origin of our solar system. Watch What You Need To Know About Asteroids and Other Near-Earth Objects Learn how we find, track, and monitor near-Earth objects. Watch Featured Story Asteroid Bennu’s Rugged Surface Baffled NASA, We Finally Know Why In one of the biggest surprises of NASA's OSIRIS-REx mission, its target asteroid, Bennu, turned out to be a jagged,… Read the Story Images View images of the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft and its journey to collect a sample of asteroid Bennu. Explore An artistic visualization of the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft descending towards asteroid Bennu to collect a sample. NASA/University of Arizona Activities The Daily Minor Planet Using data from the Catalina Sky Survey, look for asteroids and help spot potential Earth impactors. Explore OSIRIS-REx Kooky Craftable Experience the wonders of OSIRIS-REx by creating your very own spacecraft in paper craft form! Image courtesy: Kooky Craftables Explore OSIRIS-REx Coloring Pages Color illustrations of the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft exploring asteroid Bennu and returning to Earth with a precious asteroid sample. Explore Pocket-Sized OSIRIS-REx Download a pocket-sized version of OSIRIS-REx and take it exploring. Explore Make Your Own Asteroid Make your own model asteroid at home using a variety of materials. Explore Down to the Core This PBS Kids activity uses a potato to test how to take a core sample. Explore 3D Models: Asteroid Bennu Download the files to print your own 3D models of Bennu. Explore Additional Resources NASA Solar System Treks: Bennu Check out these online portals and explore the surfaces of other worlds using real data returned from spacecraft. Visit Bennu now! Explore More NASA's Eyes on Asteroids This interactive app uses data to visualize the orbits of asteroids and comets. Explore More OSIRIS-REx Mission Posters Download OSIRIS-REx posters and collectibles from the University of Arizona. Explore More Podcast: Return of the OREx Check out this OSIRIS-REx episode of "Houston We Have a Podcast." Listen IAU Map of Bennu Download a map of Bennu's features from the International Astronomical Union (IAU). Explore More Asteroid Watch Dashboard Track the next five asteroids making the closest passes by Earth. Explore More NASA Small-Body Database Look up the details about user-specified asteroids and comets. Explore More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Solar System Resource Packages Science Missions Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Apophis

Explore This Section Ocean Worlds Resources Explore this page for a curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos, animations, printable graphics, and online interactives. This resource package is suitable for educators, students, and anyone interested in learning more about ocean worlds! Discover Ocean Worlds In addition to the resources on this page, follow along with updates on ocean worlds through @NASASolarSystem on your preferred social media platform. Highlights Ocean Worlds Videos Europa Animations and Videos Titan Animations and Videos Activities Additional Resources NASA Ocean worlds page Ocean Worlds Earth isn't the only ocean world in our solar system. Water on other worlds exists in diverse forms on moons, dwarf planets, and even comets. Ice, water vapor in the atmosphere, and oceans on other worlds offer clues in the quest to discover life beyond our home planet. Learn more about the ocean worlds in our solar system and beyond. Explore Highlights Dragonfly Europa Clipper Dragonfly Mission to Titan Advancing our search for the building blocks of life, NASA's Dragonfly rotorcraft-lander will make multiple flights to sample and examine sites around Saturn's exotic moon Titan. The mission is scheduled to launch in July of 2028 and arrive at Titan by 2034. Learn More Artist's concept of NASA's Dragonfly on the surface of Saturn's moon Titan. The car-sized rotorcraft will be equipped to characterize the habitability of Titan's environment, investigate the progression of prebiotic chemistry in an environment where carbon-rich material and liquid water may have mixed for an extended period, and even search for chemical indications of whether water-based or hydrocarbon-based life once existed on Titan. NASA/Johns Hopkins APL/Steve Gribben Europa Clipper NASA's Europa Clipper has embarked on its long voyage to Jupiter, where it will investigate Europa, a moon with an enormous subsurface ocean that may have conditions to support life. The spacecraft launched at 12:06 p.m. EDT on Monday, October 14, 2024 aboard a SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket from Launch Pad 39A at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Learn More This illustration shows the Europa Clipper spacecraft, which is being developed for launch in October 2024, approaching Jupiter's moon Europa. NASA/JPL-Caltech Ocean Worlds Videos Hunting for Life on Icy Worlds: Iceland's Extreme Environments Reveal Clues To understand how life might survive on icy ocean worlds, NASA astrobiologists travel to Iceland—home to subglacial lakes, geothermal vents, and chemically rich waters that echo conditions on distant moons. Watch EELS (Exobiology Extant Life Surveyor) Learn about EELS (Exobiology Extant Life Surveyor), a snakelike robot that is capable of exploring the surfaces and icy depths of ocean worlds. Watch Exploring Ocean Worlds Our solar system is home to a diverse array of ocean worlds: bodies that contain oceans and seas of liquid, usually water, either on their surfaces or underneath icy crusts. Learn more about these ocean worlds and a few future mission concepts to explore their plumes, surfaces, and ocean depths. Watch Ask an Astrobiologist: Ocean World Science Tune in to this episode of Ask an Astrobiologist to learn about ocean exploration, ocean worlds in our solar system, and what it's like living and working on a research vessel. Watch Are There Oceans on Other Worlds? We Asked a NASA Expert Earth is not the only world that has oceans. When you look deeper into our solar system, there are worlds that we suspect that have oceans hidden beneath their icy surfaces. Watch Ocean Worlds: The Search for Life Life as we know it requires three ingredients: energy, organic molecules, and liquid water. Our search for life beyond Earth is a search for planets, dwarf planets, and moons that harbor substantial liquid water. Watch What You Need to Know About Ocean Worlds Our planet is a beautiful water-filled world, teeming with life. But did you know that Earth is not the only world in our solar system with an ocean? Here's what you need to know about ocean worlds. Watch Europa Animations and Videos Is There Potential for Life on Europa? We Asked a NASA Expert Could there be life on Europa? It's possible. And Europa Clipper is going to explore Europa to help try to answer that question. Watch Europa Clipper: Exploring Jupiter's Ocean Moon NASA's Europa Clipper is the first mission dedicated to studying Jupiter's icy moon Europa, one of the most promising places in our solar system to find an environment suitable for life outside of Earth. Watch Why Does NASA Want to Explore Jupiter's Ocean Moon? Learn about NASA's Europa Clipper mission and its main science goals. Watch NASA's Design for Message Heading to Jupiter's Moon Europa There's a legacy of NASA spacecraft carrying inspirational messages into the cosmos, and Europa Clipper will continue this tradition when it launches to Europa. Watch What You Need to Know About Europa Deep beneath the crust of Jupiter's frozen moon Europa lies a massive liquid water ocean. Exploring this ocean world with our Europa Clipper spacecraft could provide new clues in our search for life beyond Earth. Watch Water Vapor Detected In Europa's Atmosphere NASA's Hubble Space Telescope's observations of Europa have revealed the presence of persistent water vapor — but, mysteriously, only in one hemisphere. Watch Water Vapor Plumes on Europa Learn about the detection of water vapor on Jupiter's moon, Europa. Note: This video is also available in Spanish. Watch Europa: Ocean World Discover why scientists are so excited about Europa's potential to answer one of humanity's most profound questions – is there life beyond Earth? Watch Titan Animations and Videos Are Titan's Lakes Teeming with Primitive Cells? Saturn's largest moon is covered with the carbon-based building blocks of life and is the only place that we know of besides Earth with large lakes on its surface – made from super-chilled methane instead of water. Could exotic lifeforms be brewing on Titan? Watch Webb Spies Rain Clouds, New Molecule on Titan Discover how NASA's James Webb Space Telescope is telling us more about Titan, Saturn's largest moon. Watch NASA's Dragonfly Mission: Exploring the Potential Chemistry of Titan Explore how the Dragonfly Mass Spectrometer (DraMS) will be used to study the organic composition of Titan. Watch Dragonfly Mission to Saturn's Moon Titan Learn about the Dragonfly mission to Titan: How we'll get there, what we'll do there, and how it could teach us about the building blocks of life. Watch Building Blocks for Surviving Titan Learn how Titan is expanding our understanding of the chemical complexity of the solar system and the potential for life in the universe. Watch The Science of Dragonfly Discover how Dragonfly's suite of science instruments will investigate the chemistry and habitability of Titan. Watch Activities Exploring the Universe: Ice Orbs Learn how NASA planetary scientists are probing ocean worlds in the outer solar system, searching for evidence of liquid water and possible signs of life beneath the icy surface. Put what you learn into practice by investigating a frozen sphere using various tools to learn about objects hidden inside. This activity can be adapted to include whatever materials you may already have on hand. Note: This activity is also available in Spanish. Explore Discovering Alien Oceans: Magnetism Jupiter's moon Europa poses exciting new possibilities for NASA's search for life beyond Earth. While there's still much to uncover about Europa, scientists have long known that liquid water exists beneath its icy shell. But how? Explore Discovering Alien Oceans: Density Scientists believe that Jupiter's icy moon, Europa, has a liquid-water ocean underneath its frozen surface. While we can't see that ocean directly, we can use the mass and density of known substances to predict what exists underneath the surface. In this activity, you'll use the fundamentals of density to propose a model for the interior structure of Europa. Explore Planetary (Egg) Wobble and Newton's First Law By observing the motions of spinning eggs, you will learn how to determine which are raw and which are hard-boiled. In this activity, the raw egg can be compared to an ocean world while the hard-boiled egg can be compared to a solid planetary body. Note: This activity was made for NASA's InSight mission to Mars but can be adapted to discuss ocean worlds. Explore ClipperAR: Europa Clipper Augmented Reality Experience Explore Jupiter's moon Europa and the Europa Clipper spacecraft like never before in the immersive ClipperAR (augmented reality) experience. You can visit Europa, peer through its layers, and learn about Europa's ingredients for life. Explore Color Europa, a Moon of Jupiter Europa is one of Jupiter's moons, and scientists believe that it may have twice as much water as Earth, though it is so cold on Europa that water on the surface of this moon is frozen. Give color to Europa with this coloring page. Note: This activity is also available in Spanish . Explore Make a Colorful Crayon Europa with Textures! In this activity, you can explore the textures of Europa, one of Jupiter's many moons. Note: This activity is also available in Spanish . Explore Additional Resources Small Steps, Giant Leaps Podcast: Dragonfly - Mission to Titan Hear from Zibi Turtle, the principal investigator for Dragonfly, as she discusses this mission to Titan. Explore More NASA Solar System Treks NASA Solar System Treks are online, browser-based portals that allow you to explore the surfaces of other worlds using real data returned from a growing fleet of spacecraft. Visit Europa, Titan, and Ganymede now! Explore More Ocean Worlds Lithograph Learn about ocean worlds and their potential for harboring life in this handout. Explore More Planetary Analogs Discover how scientists use Earth as a test lab to learn about other worlds in the solar system. Explore More Analog Explorer This gallery shows field research sites on Earth side-by-side with similar environments on other worlds. Research at planetary analog locations on Earth helps scientists make sense of the solar system. Explore More Europa Clipper: Journey to an Ocean World Poster Download your own Europa Clipper poster, desktop background, or mobile wallpaper. Explore More Deep Dive on Europa Infographic Learn more about Europa with this colorful infographic. Explore More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Solar System Resource Packages Enceladus Europa Clipper Dragonfly Dragonfly, the first-of-its-kind rotorcraft to explore another world, will fly to various locations on Saturn’s moon Titan to investigate the…

5 min read Human-Related Microbes May Survive Moon’s South Pole, NASA Finds Lonnie Shekhtman Senior Science Writer Aug 19, 2026 Article This image was taken by an Artemis II astronaut from the Orion capsule in April 2026, as the spacecraft traveled past the Moon and back over 10 days. The gray-brown, heavily cratered Moon dominates the frame against black space, with a partially lit crescent Earth setting behind its upper-left edge. NASA Lee esta historia en español aquí. Some of Earth’s microbes likely to hitch a ride to space with human explorers could survive in the shaded nooks and crannies of the Moon’s South Pole region, NASA scientists say. Published on Aug. 19, 2026, in Science Advances , these findings highlight a need to better understand microbial persistence in extreme lunar environments. As humans build a permanent presence on the Moon, it may become difficult to distinguish ancient lunar chemistry from contamination delivered by visiting astronauts. The concern extends beyond the Moon and on to Mars, scientists say. “Humans are natural explorers, and with them come their voices, their memories … and their microbes,” said Prabal Saxena , a planetary scientist who led the study from NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. “For some scientists, myself included, that reality can be unsettling. But it also creates an opportunity to turn an imperfect situation into a useful experiment.” Bringing microbes along is unavoidable: Humans have, on average, 1 million bacteria living on each patch of skin the size of a pencil eraser, for example. These bacteria vent from spacesuits and habitats. Though the paper’s authors worry about contamination interfering with the search for chemical clues to ancient geology or biology, they also argue that the Moon should be used as a natural lab. In shaded areas around the South Pole, scientists could carefully test the real-life limits of microbial survival in an environment that can’t easily be reproduced on Earth. The Apollo program landed six pairs of astronauts on the Moon between 1969 and 1972. All six landing sites are near the lunar equator. In this visualization, the Apollo sites are contrasted with the South Pole, an area with enormous potential for future exploration. Time passes as we zoom toward Shackleton crater at the South Pole, revealing illumination conditions quite different from those near the equator. While many craters remain in permanent shadow, some nearby mountains and ridges are in persistent sunshine, making them attractive candidates for solar power and long-term habitation. NASA’s Scientific Visualization Studio/Ernie Wright Before any surface science can happen, scientists need a baseline measurement of what contaminants humans bring, the authors say. “We need to understand what was there before us, because when we go to Mars to search for signs of life beyond our planet, we will want to make sure it’s not stuff we brought,” said Andrew Needham , a NASA Goddard-based paper co-author who is an Artemis contamination‑control scientist for lunar samples. Even with strict sterilization procedures, some organisms are stubbornly resilient. A good example is Aspergillus niger, which is a fungus that thrives in warm, damp places like household bathrooms and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems. Astronauts have sampled it inside the International Space Station, and experiments demonstrate that the fungus can survive outside the station as well. Aspergillus niger was one of five microbes, including bacteria and fungi, selected for this study because of its known toughness in spaceflight environments. That microbes survived on the space station’s exterior surprised scientists. These species are typically not considered “extremophiles” that can withstand harsh conditions, such as the vacuum of space, according to Aaron Regberg , a geomicrobiologist at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston. “I would have expected these microbes to have dried out,” said Regberg, who studies space station bacteria and was a co-author on the paper. NASA astronaut Kate Rubins on Oct. 14, 2016, collecting microbes in the Japanese Experiment Module aboard the International Space Station. JAXA/Takuya Onishi He pointed out that NASA often bakes robotic spacecraft at temperatures above 400 degrees Fahrenheit to reduce the number of living organisms on them. But that’s not possible with astronauts, so contamination concerns take on new meaning in crewed exploration of the Moon’s south polar environment. A clearer picture of where microbes might survive comes from understanding how sunlight behaves at the poles. Survival in this study means the microbe can stay alive for at least one Earth day, which does not mean that it can grow and reproduce. Because the Moon has a very small tilt on its axis, the view from its poles is of a Sun that appears to hover just above the horizon, skimming the surface like a flashlight laying on a table. As a result, elevated parts of the surface, including crater ridges, mountains, and even small bumps, block light from reaching low-lying terrain. This produces pockets of shadowed areas that can remain cold and preserve water, as well as shield fragile molecules and possible microorganisms from lethal radiation. With that scientific context in mind, the team set out to test which Earth microbes could survive extreme polar conditions. They focused on organisms commonly found in spaceflight environments and those common on human skin. Besides Aspergillus niger, these included Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, Deinococcus radiodurans, and several species of Fusarium. Based on an analysis of previous studies, the scientists noted the maximum amount of heat and ultraviolet (UV) radiation each organism can withstand. Then, the organisms were tested in simulations of three regions near the lunar South Pole — Nobile Rim, Connecting Ridge, and De Gerlache Rim. Those simulations used detailed environmental maps built from elevation and temperature data collected by instruments aboard NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter , combined with models of how radiation strikes the surface. The models showed maps of “survivable niches” that range in size from a miles-wide crater floor to an astronaut's boot print. Aspergillus niger, which was most resistant to UV radiation, was able to survive even in areas with some sunlight exposure. UV radiation is so deadly to most microbes that it’s used for sterilization in hospitals. “When we think of the Moon, we don’t typically think of biology,” said Heather Graham , a paper co-author at NASA Goddard who helps develop tools and techniques for detecting biology that may look nothing like Earth’s. “But the Moon is a place where a cell can survive, so our first exploration of these sites should pay extra attention to our microbial hitchhikers and work hard to characterize lunar chemistry before our visits change what we will find.” The authors note that while some microbes can survive in a dormant state in regions around the South Pole, and thereby confuse some future scientific investigations, there is no evidence the Moon has key ingredients to sustain growth and replication. Such ingredients include liquid water, which typically requires an atmosphere and moderate temperatures. For more information, visit: https://science.nasa.gov/astrobiology Learn More and Get Involved International Observe the Moon Night, Sept. 19, 2026 Each year, observers around the world come together to celebrate Earth's Moon through direct observations, hands-on activities, lunar-themed music, artwork, readings, and more. The Moon From lighting up our skies to preserving evidence of our solar system’s history, Earth’s closest neighbor plays a pivotal role in the study of our planet and beyond. About the Author Lonnie Shekhtman Senior Science Writer Shekhtman helps communicate NASA planetary science to the world through news and feature stories on NASA.gov, videos for NASA+ and YouTube, and by working with the media. She reports on lunar and Mars science and exploration; NASA's search for life; missions to Venus, Titan, and Jupiter's Trojan asteroids; and many other topics related to NASA's exploration of our solar system and beyond.

3 min read NASA’s LRO Images Falcon 9 Crater on Moon, Learns New Details NASA Science Editorial Team Aug 18, 2026 Article This is an animated before-and-after view of the crater formed after a Falcon 9 upper stage struck the Moon’s surface on Aug. 5, 2026. These images were taken between Aug. 11 and 12 by the Narrow-Angle Camera on NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter. These images are enlarged three times from the original, with north facing up, and they cover an area about a quarter of a mile wide. NASA Goddard/Intuitive Machines Between Aug. 11 and 12, NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) captured a series of images of a new crater on the Moon. The crater formed on Aug. 5, when a SpaceX Falcon 9 upper stage impacted the surface following its January 2025 launch of the Firefly Blue Ghost 1 mission. To capture imagery of the impact, engineers tilted the spacecraft so its cameras would point toward the crater each time LRO passed about 60 miles above the Moon, traveling 1 mile per second. The orbiter circles the Moon from pole to pole every two hours, while the Moon slowly rotates underneath it. To photograph a specific spot, the spacecraft must wait until that location turns into view, which took six days in this case. Getting the pointing right was only half the challenge; timing had to be accurate as well. If the camera snapped even 10 seconds too early or too late, the target would drift off-center by 10 miles. An artist concept video showing NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter circling the Moon. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Conceptual Image Lab Because of the variety of viewing angles, scientists could see the crater under multiple lighting conditions that revealed unique features. In images where the crater rim stood out, scientists measured its 60‑foot width. Scientists also determined the crater is less than 10 feet deep based on the length of its shadow. To capture these details, LRO used its Narrow-Angle Camera, which can spot features as small as 3 feet wide. Collected between Aug. 11 and 12 by NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, six days after a Falcon 9 upper-stage booster impacted the Moon, these images were taken from different viewing angles, bringing out different features. The darker area that fans around the crater in the upper-left image is rougher than the surroundings, as this surface material has been altered over a long time by solar wind, galactic cosmic rays, and micrometeorite impacts. The brighter rays and splotch above the crater in the lower-right image is fresher material that was excavated from deeper below the surface. The pictures are arranged in the order they were taken, starting at the top left and moving toward the bottom right, with the lighting angle from the Sun gradually changing from one image to the next. Each image is enlarged two times and shows an area of the Moon about 1,000 feet wide. NASA Goddard/Intuitive Machines The images above show bright and dark rays stretching out from the crater. The darker streaks are made of surface dust and rocks altered over a long time by solar wind, galactic cosmic rays, and micrometeorite impacts. This weathered material was excavated by the collision from 1.5 feet into the lunar surface. The brighter streaks near the crater rim are made of fresh material excavated from deeper underground. This image from NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter shows two oval regions where the Falcon 9 upper stage was likely to impact the Moon, based on calculations by engineers with NASA’s Center for Near Earth Object Studies. Both ellipses are 2.1 miles long and 0.4 miles wide. Both predictions use the same booster-trajectory calculations, but only the blue ellipse takes into account the lunar terrain. The red and blue dots show predicted impact locations, whereas the cyan dot shows the actual impact site. NASA/JPL-Caltech Finding the impact site took global coordination among experts and hobbyists. Independent astronomers first identified the rocket’s trajectory using publicly available data. NASA’s Center for Near Earth Object Studies , which tracks natural objects that could pose hazards to Earth for the agency’s Planetary Defense program, used this opportunity to test and validate tools and techniques for predicting impacts. Based at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Southern California, the center incrementally refined the trajectory until identifying the location of impact, which it provided to the Republic of Korea for their Korea Pathfinder Lunar Orbiter (Danuri) team. The team used the high-resolution LUTI camera on Danuri a few hours later to image the crater, finding the prediction was accurate to about 0.6 miles. After capturing images of the crater, the Danuri mission sent coordinates to NASA’s LRO team to help refine their follow-up imaging sequence. Comparing their new crater images with the pre-impact images, the LRO team updated the crater center coordinates: 19.4759°N, 266.7138°E, 511 meters elevation. About the Author NASA Science Editorial Team Share Details Last Updated Aug 19, 2026 Related Terms Earth's Moon Commercial Space Craters Goddard Space Flight Center Humans in Space Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Missions NASA Centers & Facilities NASA Directorates Planetary Defense Planetary Defense Coordination Office Planetary Science Planetary Science Division Science Mission Directorate The Solar System Explore More 4 min read NASA Tests Dual Mode Propulsion CubeSat Ahead of Launch Spacecraft propulsion traditionally relies on volatile fuels and separate, bulky systems for different types of… Article 1 day ago 4 min read TB 26-07 Aluminum Alloy 2219 Material Guidance For more information, contact Donald S. Parker, Kennedy Space Center, donald.s.parker@nasa.gov Download the PDF version… Article 2 days ago 5 min read Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the… Article 2 days ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Missions Humans in Space Climate Change Solar System

4 min read NASA’s Artemis II Lunar Science Operations to Inform Future Missions Lonnie Shekhtman Senior Science Writer Aug 21, 2025 Article An image of the eastern hemisphere of the Moon as the Artemis II astronauts would see it from an altitude of about 7,000 kilometers. The Moon’s far side is mostly dark in this image, which is based on a simulated trajectory. The dark patches near the center of the sunlit portion are plains of ancient lava: Mare Marginis to the north and Mare Smythii to the south. NASA Goddard/Ernie Wright NASA’s Artemis II mission, set to send four astronauts on a nearly 10-day mission around the Moon and back, will advance the agency’s goal to land astronauts at the Moon’s south polar region and will help set the stage for future crewed Mars missions. While the Artemis II crew will be the first humans to test NASA’s Orion spacecraft in space, they will also conduct science investigations that will inform future deep space missions, including a lunar science investigation as Orion flies about 4,000 to 6,000 miles from the Moon’s surface. From this distance, the Moon will appear to be the size of a basketball held at arm’s length and will provide a unique opportunity for scientific observations. Artemis II is a chance for astronauts to implement the lunar science skills they've developed in training. It’s also an opportunity for scientists and the engineers in mission control to collaborate during real-time operations ... Kelsey Young Artemis II lunar science lead at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. As Orion passes on the far side of the Moon — the side that always faces away from Earth ­— the crew will analyze and photograph geologic features on the surface, such as impact craters and ancient lava flows, relying on their extensive geology training in the classroom and in Moon-like places on Earth. The astronauts will also practice describing nuances in shapes, textures, and colors of surface features. This type of information reveals the geologic history of an area and will be critical to collect when Artemis III astronauts explore the surface. Artemis III will target landing sites near the lunar South Pole, where ancient rocks, minerals, and trapped water ice may contain clues to the formation and evolution of our planet and the solar system. Download video here: https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/14886. Credit: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Dan Gallagher “Artemis II is a chance for astronauts to implement the lunar science skills they've developed in training,” said Kelsey Young, Artemis II lunar science lead at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. “It’s also an opportunity for scientists and the engineers in mission control to collaborate during real-time operations, building on the years of testing and simulations that our teams have done together.” Young leads a team of scientists with expertise in impact cratering, volcanism, tectonism, and lunar ice, who will provide real-time data analysis and guidance to the Artemis II crew in space. During the mission, the lunar science team will be located in mission control’s Science Evaluation Room at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston. In this May 2024 photo, lunar scientists are working in a mock Science Evaluation Room on the upper floor of the Mission Control Center building at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston. On the large screens in the background, they are following live as NASA astronauts Kate Rubins and Andre Douglas simulate a moonwalk, in the dark, in northern Arizona’s San Francisco Volcanic Field to help NASA prepare for its Artemis III mission. Scheduled to launch in 2027, Artemis III will land two astronauts at the Moon’s South Pole region. As they did during the 2024 moonwalk simulation, scientists will develop detailed science plans for South Pole moonwalks and provide geology expertise to mission control. NASA/Robert Markowitz The four Artemis II astronauts, NASA’s Reid Wiseman, Victor Glover, and Christina Koch, and CSA’s (Canadian Space Agency) Jeremy Hansen, could be the first humans to see some parts of the Moon’s far side with the naked eye, depending on the spacecraft’s final trajectory as determined upon launch. During the nine Apollo missions that left Earth’s orbit, astronauts saw parts of the Moon’s far side, but not all of it, as they were limited by which sections were lit during their orbits. One previously unlit region they may see is the Orientale Basin , a 600-mile-wide crater that serves as a transition point between the near and far side and is sometimes partly visible along the Moon’s western edge. The astronauts may also get to observe flashes of light from space rocks striking the surface—clues that help reveal how often the Moon gets hit—or dust floating above the edge of the Moon, a mysterious phenomenon scientists want to understand. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This visualization simulates what the crew of Artemis II might see out the Orion windows on the day of their closest approach to the Moon. It compresses 36 hours into a little more than a minute as it flies the virtual camera on a realistic trajectory that swings the spacecraft around the Moon's far side. This sample trajectory is timed so that the far side is fully illuminated when the astronauts fly by, but other lighting conditions are possible depending on the exact Artemis II launch date. The launch is scheduled for no later than April of 2026. Download here: https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/5536/ NASA Goddard/Ernie Wright The crew’s observations will help pave the way for lunar science activities on future Artemis missions to the Moon’s surface, including Artemis III . Artemis III astronauts will investigate the land forms, rocks, and other features around their landing site. They will also collect rock samples for generations of analyses in Earth labs and set up several instruments to investigate lunar properties and resources — information critical to future human exploration efforts. “Whether they’re looking out the spacecraft’s windows or walking the surface, Artemis astronauts will be working on behalf of all scientists to collect clues to the ancient geologic processes that shaped the Moon and our solar system,” said Cindy Evans, NASA’s Artemis geology training and strategic integration lead, based at NASA Johnson. In addition to lunar science observations, the crew will gather data on the effects of the space environment on the crew’s health and performance. These experiments will be managed through the Payload Mission Operations Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, in tight coordination with mission control. This data could inform long-term lunar exploration and future human missions to Mars. For more information on Artemis II, visit: https://www.nasa.gov/mission/artemis-ii/ Related: Artemis II Lunar Science Multimedia Gallery Karen Fox / Molly Wasser Headquarters, Washington 202-358-1600 karen.c.fox@nasa.gov / molly.l.wasser@nasa.gov Lonnie Shekhtman NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. Lonnie.shekhtman@nasa.gov About the Author Lonnie Shekhtman Senior Science Writer Shekhtman helps communicate NASA planetary science to the world through news and feature stories on NASA.gov, videos for NASA+ and YouTube, and by working with the media. She reports on lunar and Mars science and exploration; NASA's search for life; missions to Venus, Titan, and Jupiter's Trojan asteroids; and many other topics related to NASA's exploration of our solar system and beyond. Share Details Last Updated Dec 19, 2025 Related Terms The Solar System Artemis Artemis 2 Artemis 3 Astronauts Earth's Moon Goddard Space Flight Center Humans in Space Johnson Space Center Lunar Discovery & Exploration Program Lunar Science Marshall Space Flight Center Planetary Science Planetary Science Division Science & Research Science Mission Directorate Explore More 4 min read NASA Tests Dual Mode Propulsion CubeSat Ahead of Launch Spacecraft propulsion traditionally relies on volatile fuels and separate, bulky systems for different types of… Article 1 day ago 5 min read NASA Unveils Winning Designs for Mars Space Food Systems Challenge NASA announced the winners of the Deep Space Food Challenge: Mars to Table Thursday, with… Article 2 days ago 5 min read US-India Satellite Captures Time-lapse Video of Volcanic Eruption Like tendrils on a vine, lava spreads out from the northern crater of Krasheninnikov, a… Article 3 days ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Missions Humans in Space Climate Change Solar System

Earth's Moon The Moon & Eclipses Contents Lunar Eclipse Basics Types of Lunar Eclipses Upcoming Lunar Eclipses "Blood Moon": How It Works The Moon and Solar Eclipses Upcoming Solar Eclipses The Moon's Tilted Orbit Anywhere from four to seven times a year, our Earth, Moon and Sun line up just right to create the cosmic-scale shadow show known as an eclipse. The Moon's orbit around Earth is tilted relative to Earth's orbit around the Sun. This tilt is the reason why we have occasional eclipses instead of eclipses every month. There are two types of eclipses: lunar and solar. During a lunar eclipse, Earth’s shadow obscures the Moon. During a solar eclipse, the Moon blocks the Sun from view. Lunar Eclipse Basics Lunar eclipses occur at the full Moon phase . When Earth is positioned precisely between the Moon and Sun, Earth’s shadow falls upon the surface of the Moon, dimming it and sometimes turning the lunar surface a striking red over the course of a few hours. Each lunar eclipse is visible from half of Earth. Types of Lunar Eclipses Total lunar eclipse The Moon moves into the inner part of Earth’s shadow, or the umbra. Some of the sunlight passing through Earth’s atmosphere reaches the Moon’s surface, lighting it dimly. Colors with shorter wavelengths ― the blues and violets ― scatter more easily than colors with longer wavelengths, like red and orange. Because these longer wavelengths make it through Earth’s atmosphere, and the shorter wavelengths have scattered away, the Moon appears orangish or reddish during a lunar eclipse. The more dust or clouds in Earth’s atmosphere during the eclipse, the redder the Moon appears. Partial lunar eclipse An imperfect alignment of Sun, Earth and Moon results in the Moon passing through only part of Earth's umbra. The shadow grows and then recedes without ever entirely covering the Moon. Penumbral eclipse If you don’t know this one is happening, you might miss it. The Moon travels through Earth’s penumbra, or the faint outer part of its shadow. The Moon dims so slightly that it can be difficult to notice. Upcoming Lunar Eclipses Date Eclipse Type Geographic Region of Visibility August 28, 2026 (UTC) Partial East Pacific, Americas, Europe, Africa February 20, 2027 (UTC) Penumbral Americas, Europe, Africa, Asia, western Australia View data source "Blood Moon": How It Works The same phenomenon that makes our sky blue and our sunsets red causes the Moon to turn reddish-orange during a lunar eclipse. Sunlight appears white, but it actually contains a rainbow of components—and different colors of light have different physical properties. Blue light scatters relatively easily as it passes through Earth’s atmosphere. Reddish light, on the other hand, travels more directly through the air. When the Sun is high on a clear day, we see blue light scattered throughout the sky overhead. At sunrise and sunset, when the Sun is near the horizon, incoming sunlight travels a longer, low-angle path through Earth's atmosphere to observers on the ground. The bluer part of the sunlight scatters away in the distance (where it's still daytime), and only the yellow-to-red part of the spectrum reaches our eyes. During a lunar eclipse, the Moon appears red or orange because any sunlight that's not blocked by our planet is filtered through a thick slice of Earth’s atmosphere on its way to the lunar surface. It’s as if all the world’s sunrises and sunsets are projected onto the Moon. The landscape of the Moon, foreground, is reddened by sunlight filtered through Earth's atmosphere. The Sun is obscured by the Earth, but the glow of its corona is visible. NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio The Moon and Solar Eclipses Solar eclipses happen only at the new Moon phase , when the Moon is between Earth and the Sun. During a s olar eclipse , the Moon casts a shadow on Earth, and blocks or partially blocks our view of the Sun. Though solar eclipses happen as often as lunar eclipses, they are visible from such a small area of Earth each time that it’s much rarer to encounter one. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video In this animation, the umbra portion of the Moon’s shadow barely reaches the Earth as it traces a path across North America. NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio During a solar eclipse , the Moon's shadow on Earth’s surface is only about 300 miles (480 km) wide. The shadow consists of two parts, the umbra, where the Sun is completely blocked, and the penumbra, where the Sun is partially obscured. People in the umbra will see a total eclipse, while people in the penumbra will see a partial eclipse. Though the shadow is narrow and the total eclipse lasts for only minutes, our planet rotates fast enough to bring the shadow a third of the way around Earth's surface before the Moon moves out of alignment with the Sun. Upcoming Solar Eclipses Date Eclipse Typ e Geographic Region of Visibility August 12, 2026 (UTC) Total Greenland, Iceland, Spain, Russia, and a small area of Portugal (with a partial eclipse in Europe, Africa, North America, the Atlantic Ocean, Arctic Ocean, and Pacific Ocean) February 6, 2027 (UTC) Annular Chile, Argentina, and the Atlantic (with a partial eclipse in South America, Antarctica, western & southern Africa) August 2, 2027 (UTC) Total Morocco, Spain, Algeria, Libya, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and Somalia (with a partial eclipse in other areas of Africa, Europe, the Middle East, and western & southern Asia) View data source That we often get such impressive solar eclipses on Earth is a lucky chance of nature. The Sun is vastly larger than the Moon ― its diameter is about 400 times the Moon’s. But the Moon is roughly 400 times closer to Earth. This makes it possible for the Moon to almost perfectly block out the Sun when everything aligns. This state of affairs won’t last forever. The Moon started its existence much closer to Earth, and has been slowly drifting outward at the rate of about 1.5 inches (3.8 cm) per year. Once it makes it past 14,600 miles (23,500 km), it’ll appear too small from Earth to cover the Sun. But don’t panic if you haven’t seen an eclipse yet ― you’ve got another 600-million-plus years before that border is breached. In the meantime, you can get a preview during an annular eclipse, when the Sun, Moon and Earth align but the Moon’s orbit places it too far away from Earth to entirely block the disk of the Sun. During an annular eclipse, the sky takes on a twilight cast, but some of the Sun still shows. The Moon's Tilted Orbit The Moon’s orbit is tilted about 5 degrees compared to the plane of Earth’s orbit around the Sun. Because of this tilt, the Moon as seen from Earth’s perspective usually passes above or below the Sun when it passes between us and the Sun. The tilt of the Moon’s orbit prevents us from having monthly solar and lunar eclipses. This animation illustrates how the tilt of the Moon’s orbit often keeps it out of alignment with the Sun and Earth, preventing frequent eclipses. NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio Eclipses and Spacecraft LRO and Lunar Eclipses Satellites are designed to travel in and out of the Sun's light and store energy with batteries, so for the most part, eclipses have little to no effect on their operation. But these events can provide unique observation opportunities. During lunar eclipses, mission controllers shut down most instruments on NASA's solar-powered Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) to conserve energy while it's cut off from its source of power but leave active one instrument—called Diviner—that can watch how the lunar surface responds to the rapid change in temperature caused by a lunar eclipse. Since different rock sizes cool at different rates, scientists can use the data to infer the size and density of rocks on the Moon and better understand the composition and properties of the surface. Learn More: LRO's Dance With Eclipses about LRO and Lunar Eclipses The Diviner Lunar Radiometer instrument onboard the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter has been mapping the temperature of the Moon since its launch in 2009. These images (though not taken during an eclipse) illustrate the difference in maximum daytime and nighttime temperatures at the Moon's North Pole. NASA/GSFC/UCLA Activities LRO Eclipse Activities Activities teach about eclipse science, lunar topography, the role of light and shadow, LRO and more. Eclipse 2024: The Moon's Moment in the Sun To know exactly where and when a solar eclipse will cast its shadow, we study our nearest neighbor in space. Evaluating a Lunar Eclipse Students in grades 3-12 illustrate the range of colors and brightness the Moon can take on during a lunar eclipse. Explore Further Expand your knowledge about lunar eclipses and the Moon. Lunar Eclipses: Past and Future Tables record past and upcoming eclipses. Read More Earth During a Lunar Eclipse What would Earth would look like from the Moon during an eclipse? Watch the video Understanding Lunar Eclipses Lunar eclipses let us glimpse our planet's shadow. Watch the video NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter LRO has been mapping and photographing the Moon since 2009. Read More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture. Artemis Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Skywatching

Observe the Moon International Observe the Moon Night An annual celebration of lunar observation, science, and exploration. Image credit: lunar observer Leonardo Hoet Provide Feedback Your feedback helps us improve this program each year. Find An Event Who's observing the Moon near you? Browse local and virtual events. Register Your Participation Whether you're observing on your own or hosting an event, sign up here. Share Your View Submit your event photos and Moon art to the collaborative Flickr gallery. Join In Host an Event Connect Register Ways To Observe Moon Maps You're invited. SAVE THE DATE! September 10, 2027 Each year, observers around the world come together to celebrate Earth's Moon through direct observations, hands-on activities, lunar-themed music, artwork, readings, and more. Join in from wherever you are: Observe the Moon from home , host a virtual or in-person event, or find an event near you . Learn More Observe With Your Community Interested in hosting your own International Observe the Moon Night event? Your event can be a small gathering of friends or family, an online program for thousands of visitors, or anything in between. Our event planning guide is packed with tips and resources to help you get started. Event Planning Guide Cape Fear Museum Connect Share your perspective, and get the latest Moon observing tips. For NASA lunar science updates, Moon observing tips, and event hosting ideas delivered straight to your inbox, sign up for our newsletter . Share your observing experience and find out how others observe the Moon on X, Facebook , Instagram , and Flickr . Stay In Touch Mark Your Participation Register to join the International Observe the Moon Night community. Everyone on Earth (and beyond!) is invited to observe with us. Register to mark your participation on the International Observe the Moon Night map and connect with a worldwide community of lunar observers. Register Credit: Zach Tejral 10 Ways to Observe the Moon Make or admire Moon art. Relax on your couch with lunar data visualizations. Listen to a podcast. Take a virtual Moon tour. Observing the Moon is something you can do no matter the weather, time of day, or location! Here are ten of our favorite ways to observe. Go NASA/Molly Wasser Moon Maps Scan the Moon's seas of cooled lava, and more. Whether you're observing the Moon with the unaided eye, binoculars, or a telescope, you'll find lunar points of interest to observe on & around International Observe the Moon Night, September 19, 2026. Event Maps International Observe the Moon Night 2026 Register Your Participation Put your Moon observation on the map. No matter how you plan to observe the Moon, you can mark your participation and become an official part of the International Observe the Moon Night community. Register Explore More Feedback Surveys Help us make International Observe the Moon Night better in the future. More Participation Certificate Print the official certificate for your event guests or yourself. More Save the Date 2027! Next year's International Observe the Moon Night will take place on Friday, September 10. More Stay in Touch Receive updates directly from the International Observe the Moon Night Coordinating Team by subscribing to our newsletter . More How do YOU observe the Moon? Let us know! Upload your lunar photography, Moon-themed art, and event photos to this year’s collaborative Flickr gallery. Browse and Contribute about How do YOU observe the Moon? Featured Resources Top Moon Videos (2026) Recommended videos for use at International Observe the Moon Night events or casual viewing. Moon Observation Journal Spend the next month getting to know the Moon. Multimedia Resources Find the materials you need to support your International Observe the Moon Night event. Save the Date for International Observe the Moon Night 2027 Next year's International Observe the Moon Night will take place on Friday, September 10. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Earth’s Moon The Moon makes Earth more livable, sets the rhythm of ocean tides, and keeps a record of our solar system's… Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics. Skywatching

Earth's Moon Moon Composition & Structure Quick Facts The Moon's crust is asymmetrical: thicker on the side farthest from Earth, and thinner on the near side. The Moon, like Earth, is a layered world with a core, a mantle, and a crust. Contents What Is the Moon Made Of? The Lunar Core The Lunar Mantle The Lunar Crust The Lunar Regolith How Do We Know What the Moon Is Made Of? What Is the Moon Made Of? According to leading theories about how the Moon formed , much of the stuff that makes up the Moon was once part of Earth. And like Earth, the Moon consists of three main layers: a crust, a mantle, and a core. The Moon, like Earth, is a layered or "differentiated" world with a core, mantle, and crust. NASA Billions of years ago, the Moon was a molten world. As it solidified, the heaviest materials (metals like iron) sank down into the Moon’s center, and the lighter materials (lower density rocks) rose towards the surface. The result is a structure a bit like a chocolate-dipped cherry – solid core, mostly solid/partly liquid mantle, and thin outer crust. Earth is an active, lively world. Our planet’s outer core and mantle churn with convection currents, and atop the mantle, tectonic plates diverge and collide. The Moon can seem still and silent in comparison. But the Moon is an active world, too, and its underlying structure is a mystery that scientists are still trying to unravel. The Moon has layers like Earth, but their proportions are very different. We call planetary bodies with distinct layers “differentiated worlds.” This is a simplified view. In real life, the lunar crust is lopsided: the crust on the Moon’s Earth-facing side is only about ⅔ as thick as the crust on its far side. Scientists are working to find the reason for this asymmetry. NASA/Vi Nguyen The Lunar Core The Moon’s core consists of two sections: a solid, mostly iron inner core within a molten outer core. Though primarily made of iron, the core contains some nickel and sulfur as well. The Moon’s core extends about 20 percent of the way from the Moon’s center to its surface―a smaller proportion than in other well-studied rocky worlds, whose cores can reach up to around 50 percent of their diameters. This relatively small size may be because the Moon’s violent formation left little iron to collect in its center. The Lunar Mantle The lunar mantle is the thickest layer of the Moon. It’s mostly solid, but the zone closest to the lunar core is partly molten—some moonquakes may originate here. The Moon’s mantle is mainly composed of basalt rich in olivine and pyroxene. (If you’ve ever seen peridot, you’ve seen the gem form of olivine, a mineral named for its green hue.) A Moon rock sample collected during the Apollo 17 mission, troctolite 76535, contains olivine (seen here in light-green grains). Explore this Moon rock in this 3D interactive . NASA/Johnson Space Center The Lunar Crust The Moon’s crust, or outermost layer, contains a scientific puzzle. The crust is about 37 miles (60 km) thick on the side farthest from Earth, but only 25 miles (40 km) thick on the near side ― quite a difference. Scientists are still trying to find out why the lunar crust is so uneven. Minerals forming the lunar crust are made up of oxygen, silicon, magnesium, iron, calcium, and aluminum, along with small amounts of titanium, uranium, thorium, potassium, and hydrogen. The Moon’s relatively bright, elevated highlands are rich in elements like calcium and aluminum, while the darker depressions, called maria, have more iron and titanium. (Maria are seas of cooled lava which flooded vast impact basins between 4.2 and 1.2 billion years ago. The lunar highlands are older parts of the crust that survived the intense, basin-forming impacts.) The surface of the Moon’s crust is full of geologic features. A few examples are: “Rilles,” channels or or cracks produced by long-past volcanic activity or fracturing crust; Domes formed when thick lava erupted from volcanic vents; “Wrinkle ridges,” produced by the buckling of the Moon’s surface under compressive stress, such as the weight of layers of basalt; And of course, lunar impact craters ! This view of the full moon was photographed from the Apollo 11 spacecraft at a distance of 10,000 nautical miles. The lunar highlands appear bright whitish-grey. Darker areas are maria, seas of cooled lunar lava. NASA The Gruithuisen Domes are examples of volcanic domes on the Moon. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University The Lunar Regolith Lunar regolith is the Moon’s “soil”. This dusty, rocky substance is the result of a constant cosmic assault on the lunar surface, with attackers ranging from meteorites of all sizes to charged particles from the Sun . The bombardment has broken down the upper layers of the crust, creating a thick layer of loose material that sits on top of the bedrock. Its particles include tiny dust motes, house-sized boulders, and everything in between. They’re rock chips, mineral fragments, impact and volcanic glasses, and “agglutinates” ― bits of minerals glued together with glass, created when the blazing heat of a micrometeorite impact melts some of the lunar soil. The finest fragments, lunar dust, can be smaller than 10-20 microns (much smaller than the width of a human hair). The lunar regolith is made up of fractured and broken pieces of lunar rocks, sourced from the highlands, mare basalts, and deeper materials excavated by large impacts - perhaps even from the mantle. It also contains pieces of meteorites and debris from throughout the solar system. Generally, the older the surface, the thicker the regolith. The regolith in some parts of the young maria is relatively thin (only a few feet deep, with bedrock completely exposed in rare cases ) while the older regolith on the lunar highlands can be 66 feet (20 m) deep. Beneath the lunar regolith is a region called the megaregolith, which is an upper layer of the crust composed of cracked, shattered bedrock, and massive pieces of impact ejecta. Astronaut boot prints mark the lunar regolith in this Apollo 15 photograph, taken by astronaut David Scott during a 1971 moonwalk. Part of the Apennine mountains are visible in the background. The grid of black crosses in each Apollo image can be used to calculate distances and heights on the lunar landscape. NASA How Do We Know What the Moon Is Made Of? Besides analyzing pieces of the Moon that Apollo astronauts brought home to Earth, scientists learn about the Moon’s composition and structure by studying its light signatures (this is called spectroscopy), rotation, gravitational effects, moonquakes, and more. Four seismometers deployed on the Moon by NASA astronauts during the Apollo program functioned until 1977 and left behind a wealth of data for researchers that is still being used today. The next generation of moonquake detection begins with experiments like the Farside Seismic Suite , which aims to return NASA’s first lunar seismic data from the far side of the Moon, and LEMS (the Lunar Environment Monitoring Station), a portable seismometer system designed for Artemis III astronauts to deploy on the lunar surface. Apollo 11’s Passive Seismic Experiment was the first seismometer placed on the Moon’s surface. It detected moonquakes and provided information about the internal structure of the Moon over three weeks. More advanced seismometers were deployed at the Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 landing sites and transmitted data to Earth until September 1977. NASA Scientists also study the Moon’s composition using data from orbiting observatories like the current Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) and the past Gravity Recovery and Interior Laboratory (GRAIL) mission, alongside earthbound projects like Lunar Laser Ranging (LLR), which bounces lasers off reflectors stationed on the Moon. The more information we have, the better we can refine our understanding of the Moon’s interior. Researchers are looking forward to new samples, new equipment, and new investigations that are expected to result from a return to the Moon via the Artemis missions. Writer: Tracy Vogel, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Science Advisors: Vishnu Viswanathan and Dan Moriarty, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA The Moon’s Atmosphere Does the Moon have an atmosphere? Yes, but just barely. The lunar atmosphere is mostly an exosphere, which itself is… Lunar Craters Earth's Moon is covered in craters. Lunar craters tell us the history not only of the Moon, but of our… Moon Formation Earth’s Moon was born out of destruction. There are several theories about our Moon’s formation, but almost all share that… Moon Water and Ices What’s big, covered in water, yet 100 times drier than the Sahara Desert? It’s not a riddle, it’s the Moon!

Earth's Moon The Moon's Atmosphere 3 Quick Facts The Moon's atmosphere is almost entirely made up of helium, neon, and argon, with trace amounts of other elements. Exhaust from a single Moon lander can briefly dominate the lunar atmosphere nearby. Molecules around the Moon are so few and far between that they can travel long distances without running into anything, even each other. Contents Getting to Know the Lunar Exosphere What is the Moon’s Atmosphere Made Of? The Moon’s Changing Environment Does the Moon have an atmosphere? Yes, but just barely, and it’s very different from the atmosphere we know on Earth. When people talk about the Moon’s atmosphere, they are often referring to its main layer: the lunar exosphere. Earth Moon NASA/Vi Nguyen NASA/Vi Nguyen Earth Moon comparing Atmospheres Atmospheric Layers (Images not to scale) Curtain Toggle Image Details Earth’s atmosphere has five major layers: troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere, thermosphere and exosphere. The Moon’s atmosphere contains only one major layer: its exosphere. These images are not to scale; Earth is much larger than the Moon, and neither world's atmosphere has a fixed outer limit. Credit: NASA/Vi Nguyen Getting to Know the Lunar Exosphere The lunar atmosphere is mostly an exosphere, which itself is mostly empty space. If you were to visit the Moon and walk around on its surface, you might think it had no atmosphere at all. Molecules around the Moon are so few and far between that they travel long distances without running into anything, even each other. Earth’s atmosphere, on the other hand, is dense and collisional: air molecules are bumping into each other (and interfering with each other’s movements) all the time. Since the Moon’s atmosphere is not collisional, we can study each chemical component independently. For example, some scientists work to understand how water forms and changes on the Moon by investigating the behavior of hydrogen atoms in the exosphere. Chemical components of the lunar exosphere have their own ‘cycles’ of movement between the ground and the space nearby, and distinct migration patterns from place to place on the Moon’s surface. The Moon’s atmosphere contains about one million billion (10 15 ) times fewer molecules per cubic centimeter than Earth’s does. This is primarily because Earth is more massive (so it has a stronger gravitational pull holding its atmosphere in place) and Earth has more active sources of atmospheric gases (like erupting volcanoes). Our planet’s magnetic field also helps to protect and preserve our atmosphere. Left: Earth as seen by Apollo 8 astronauts circling the Moon (1968). Right: the Moon as seen by astronauts orbiting Earth on the International Space Station (2024). NASA/Vi Nguyen What is the Moon’s Atmosphere Made Of? The lunar exosphere is almost entirely made up of helium, neon , and argon, with trace amounts of other elements. Hydrogen molecules make up a tiny fraction of the lunar exosphere, but are a topic of serious scientific interest, partly because hydrogen is one of the chemical ingredients in water . Sodium is another scarce but heavily-studied element in the lunar exosphere. Sodium’s chemical signature is relatively easy to detect from far away, making it an appealing target for observers who use Earth-based telescopes or analyze data from spacecraft in lunar orbit. The Cold Cathode Gage Experiment ( CCGE , also referred to as the Cold Cathode Ion Gage, or CCIG) was deployed as part of the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments package (ALSEP) on Apollos 12, 14, and 15. It was designed to measure the density of neutral particles to determine the amount of gas present at the lunar surface. The CCGE is the small canister-shaped instrument in this image; the large box-shaped instrument on the right is the Suprathermal Ion Detector Experiment ( SIDE ), which measured exospheric ions. NASA Most lunar exosphere science relies on data collected at a distance, but humans have also set up experiments on the ground. When the crews of Apollo 12, 14, and 15 lifted off from the Moon, they left behind devices designed to measure the amount of gas near the lunar surface. These initial experiments confirmed the presence of an extremely sparse atmosphere. Then Apollo 17 astronauts deployed a spectrometer called LACE (the Lunar Atmospheric Composition Experiment) to identify the atmosphere’s chemical makeup. Decades later, new spacecraft brought updated technology into lunar orbit for follow-up observations. THEMIS-ARTEMIS began as a five-satellite Earth-focused mission. When its original assignment ended in 2008, two of its five probes were redirected to locations near the Moon, where they now measure charged particles swept away from the lunar exosphere by solar wind. NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter ( LRO ), an SUV-sized spacecraft with seven science instruments on board, has been sending data home from lunar orbit since 2009. In 2013-2014, the Lunar Environment and Dust Explorer ( LADEE for short) joined LRO for a six-month orbital mission, gathering detailed information about the lunar exosphere’s composition and structure – and giving new insight into how these change over time. The Moon’s Changing Environment In contrast to Earth’s thick layers of air, the Moon’s exosphere is a bit like the haze you get when you whack a dirty rug with a broom: it includes a sampling of particles knocked free by impact . But instead of a rug, these particles come from the lunar surface. Instead of flying through the air, they’re ejected into near-emptiness. And instead of a broom, the Moon is pummeled by space debris . Micrometeorites and other impactors temporarily kick up dust particles and even individual atoms from the Moon’s surface. All the while, the solar wind delivers protons and other materials from the Sun. As some particles settle to the ground or escape into space, new impacts send others aloft. Some pieces of space debris are too small to make craters, but they still disturb the lunar surface. Impacts of all sizes mix up the Moon’s outermost layers and expose fresh material that was once hidden underground. This shuffling of dust and rock is called impact gardening. NASA Human and robotic activity change the lunar exosphere, too. Exhaust from a single lunar lander can briefly dominate the space nearby. Since spacecraft exhaust includes water and other chemical ingredients that also occur naturally on the Moon, studies of the lunar environment must account for exploration-related changes. Scientists are already running simulations to anticipate the atmospheric effects of future Moon landings. Writer: Caela Barry, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Science Advisors: Dana Hurley and Parvathy Prem, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory; Bill Farrell, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture. Artemis Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Skywatching

Earth's Moon Moon Craters On the Moon, where there’s no liquid water or wind, evidence of our solar system's impact history has been preserved for billions of years. Craters are marks the passing universe leaves on the Moon, a cosmic guestbook. Contents What Are Lunar Craters? Why Does the Moon Have Craters? Types of Craters Simple Craters Complex Craters Basins How Craters Form How Basins Form What Are Lunar Craters? Lunar impact craters are the depressions left behind after an asteroid, meteoroid, or comet collides with the Moon. Though craters are visible on worlds throughout the solar system, lunar craters are special because we can see them close-up, and the relative lack of erosion and other surface processes on the Moon keep them well-preserved. Moon craters fascinate us because they are a record of the process that built and shaped our entire solar system, the fingerprints of history pressed into the lunar surface . The lunar north pole, captured by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera, is dappled with craters highlighted in a stark display of sunlight and shadow. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Why Does the Moon Have Craters? Solar systems form through collision. Tiny flecks of dust strike and stick to one another, gradually transforming through accumulation into pebbles, boulders, and planetoids, and then finally into planets. The bits and pieces left behind by this process are still here as the rocky and icy objects that populate areas in our solar system like the asteroid belt, Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud. Collisions continue even today, with solar system bodies periodically pummeled by these leftovers. The meteoroids, asteroids and comets left swirling about the Sun are occasionally drawn into a gravitational embrace with their bigger siblings. On Earth, erosion and plate tectonics slowly erase their imprints. But when we look at the sky, the Moon’s craters are visual proof of the messy process that led to our planet’s creation. Meteor Crater in Arizona is a young crater at only 50,000 years old, and is well-preserved by the arid climate of the Colorado Plateau. USGS A supercomputer simulation shows a Mars-sized body crashing into Earth, a potential formation scenario for our Moon early in the solar system's history. NASA's Ames Research Center In this striking view of the Moon's Giordano Bruno crater from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, the height and sharpness of the rim are evident. These features indicate Giordano Bruno is a young crater, though its exact age is unknown. Recent crater counts suggest it formed up to 10 million years ago. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Types of Craters Simple Craters ...are typically what people would sketch out if asked to draw a crater. They look smooth and are shaped like bowls with round floors. Simple lunar craters tend to be on the small side, no more than around 6-9 miles (10-15 km) in diameter. Linné crater is a young simple crater, thought to be less than 10 million years old. It is just 1.4 miles (2.2 km) wide. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Molke crater, seen here in an image from the Apollo 10 mission, is an example of a simple crater. NASA Complex Craters ...are larger than simple craters and have features like central peaks, terraces and flat floors. On the Moon, complex craters are generally around 9 miles (15 km) or more in diameter. (On Earth, they form at a much smaller size because of our planet’s stronger gravity.) This view of Aristarchus crater from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter shows clearly terraced walls and central peaks. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University The sun rises over Tycho crater's central peak complex. The crater is in the southern lunar highlands and is approximately 53 miles (85 km) in diameter and 110 million years old. A slump terrace has formed in the northern half of the young Giordano Bruno crater, seen here at sunset. NASA/GSFC/ Arizona State University Hayn Crater, located just northeast of Mare Humboldtianum, is an exquisite example of a complex crater. The central peak complex in the image above is dramatically illuminated by the low Sun casting long shadows across the crater floor. Terracing along the walls is clearly visible. The floor of Hayn crater contains spectacular remnants of the impact event: impact melt, slump blocks, and complex debris. In some areas, rocks on the floor have cracked and eroded into fields of boulders. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Basins ...are enormous craters that are more than 186 miles (300 km) in diameter on the Moon. Lunar samples suggest that most of the major basins on the Moon formed around 3.9 billion years ago in a still-mysterious period called the Late Heavy Bombardment . Over time, many basins filled with magma, creating the dark, basaltic Moon "mare" that we can see with the unaided eye from Earth. There are more than 40 impact basins on the Moon, and they play a significant role in the Moon’s geology. The impacts that created the Moon’s basins were intense enough to not just melt rock but also to influence volcanic flows from the Moon’s mantle. Orientale Basin is the youngest of the large lunar basins, thought to have formed about 3.8 billion years ago. The distinct outer ring is about 590 miles (950 km) from east-to-west. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University This image from Lunar Orbiter 1 shows the Korolev basin on the far side of the Moon. The basin is about 273 miles (440 km) in diameter, the largest crater in the image, to the left and slightly above the center. Adjacent to Korolev at about 5:00 is the crater Galois and at 6:30 is the smaller Doppler crater. The rim of the South Pole - Aitken basin is faintly visible running just below these craters. NASA How Craters Form A lunar crater forms when an asteroid, meteoroid, or comet, typically moving faster than the speed of sound, plunges into the Moon’s surface. The energy of the object ― determined by its size, density and speed ― as well as the type of surface it hits and the angle at which it hits, all factor into what kind of crater forms in this explosive impact. Crater formation has two phases: excavation, when the initial hole in the ground forms, and modification, when the shockwaves and their aftermath affect the entire area around the impact, causing the ground to deform and collapse. The largest craters are relatively shallow compared to their diameter due to modification, while the smaller craters keep their original deeper bowl shapes. When an impactor contacts the Moon’s surface, it compresses, pulverizes, and vaporizes the rock beneath it. That material then rebounds, and the energy of the rock decompressing sends shockwaves racing outward through the surface, melting some of the rock if the pressure becomes high enough. Material shoots upwards and outwards. We call this spray of pulverized rock “ejecta.” To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This animation shows the formation of a simple crater. Upon impact, a shock wave radiates into the crust and compresses it downward. Material in the crust flows downward, then up and out, resulting in a spray of ejecta that spreads along crater and outside it. Simple craters, unlike complex craters, stay relatively deep and have a basic bowl/cone shape. This animation is representative and does not reflect an accurate timescale. For original animations, see https://www.lpi.usra.edu/exploration/training/resources/impact_cratering/ NASA/Vi Nguyen; Original: Ross W. K. Potter/Center for Lunar Science and Exploration/Lunar and Planetary Institute Chemicals found in the surface ice of Cabeus crater near the Moon's south pole indicate that the crater was probably created by a comet. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Lichtenberg B is a beautifully preserved simple impact crater, located northwest of Aristarchus Plateau in Oceanus Procellarum. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Starting at the rim of the crater Lichtenberg B, impact melt flowed and formed a channel, pushing boulders aside in the process. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Some of the ejecta may be large enough to cause secondary craters when it crashes back to the surface ― these smaller craters will later be seen as chains or clusters of craters pointing back to the main crater. Most of the ejecta spreads out in the area around the crater, thicker and more uniform nearest the crater. Plumes of ejecta that settle back onto the surface form the bright rays seen radiating from many of the Moon's craters. And a portion of the ejecta may even reach orbit, as evidenced by lunar meteorites found on Earth. When the energy of the impact is powerful enough, the rebounding material stops acting like a solid and behaves like a liquid. Like the rebound from a water droplet splashing into a puddle, the liquid-like rock can form a peak in the center of the crater that rises and then collapses. As the rebound forms that central peak, material from the crater rim rushes in to fill the suddenly empty space. Large blocks of rock begin to fault and slump inward, expanding the diameter of the crater and creating the stepped features called terraces. If the impactor has even more energy, clusters or even rings of peaks can form as the crater’s central material rises and then gets pulled back by gravity. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This model shows the formation of a complex crater. Initially, a bowl-shaped cavity is excavated, but as the crust rebounds a central peak forms within minutes. The walls of the crater collapse and form terraces under the influence of gravity, leaving behind a shallower and wider crater than a simple crater. This animation is representative and does not reflect an accurate timescale. For original animations, see https://www.lpi.usra.edu/exploration/training/resources/impact_cratering/ NASA/Vi Nguyen; Original: Ross W. K. Potter/Center for Lunar Science and Exploration/Lunar and Planetary Institute The rock at the crater’s surface settles and cools into a layer of something called lunar breccia, a type of igneous rock made up of coarse, angular, shattered fragments of older rocks glued together by molten rock. Beneath that, the bedrock will have fractured, the cracks eventually tapering out as they plunge deep into the crust. Chains and clusters of secondary craters lead back to Copernicus crater in the distance. These craters were produced by material ejected when Copernicus formed. Lunar and Planetary Institute A giant swirl (or whorl) of impact melt formed in a clockwise direction within one of the larger impact melt pools inside Giordano Bruno crater. NASA/GSFC/ASU This sawn Apollo mission sample is a lunar breccia typical of ejecta from large basins. NASA How Basins Form Lunar basins are just giant craters, the aftermath of world-transforming impacts. The space rocks that created the Moon’s basins are arguably more responsible than any other factor for the appearance of the Moon we see in the sky ― and for much of its geology. The “maria” that make up the faces and characters that people imagine in the Moon are giant pools of basalt, an igneous rock formed from the magma that welled up through cracks in the crust created after impactors carved basins into the lunar surface. Basins are defined as being more than 186 miles (300 km) in diameter. They can be multiple times larger than the excavation of the initial crater, expanding as the territory around them is wracked and reshaped by impact-generated forces. The largest basin on the Moon, the South Pole-Aitken Basin , is thought to be four times larger than its initial excavation. During basin formation, the initial impact and its rebound removes and melts so much material that the entire area becomes structurally unsound, causing faults to form in the surrounding land and the walls of the crater to collapse inward, drawing in material from a wider region. The initial impact crater is erased by the intensity of the aftermath. Some basins are surrounded by multiple rings. The process of ring formation is still being studied, but scientists suspect that the rings are the result of a combination of faults and the rise and collapse of peaks that form during the impact. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video When a basin forms, the initial crater is erased in the violent aftermath. The impact deforms not just the crust (light gray) but the mantle (dark gray) as well, and mantle material rises near the surface. The central peaks that form are unstable and collapse, as do the walls of the crater, while most of the material carved out by the excavation is distributed outside the crater. This animation is representative and does not reflect an accurate timescale. For original animations, see https://www.lpi.usra.edu/exploration/training/resources/impact_cratering/ NASA/Vi Nguyen; Original: Ross W. K. Potter/Center for Lunar Science and Exploration/Lunar and Planetary Institute The Nectaris basin is 534 miles (860 km) in diameter and formed about 3.8–3.9 billion years ago. Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Schrödinger basin is a large impact feature on the far side of the Moon, near the lunar South Pole. This overhead visualization of Schrödinger basin shows the cycle of sunlight and shadow highlighting the inner peak ring and outer rim. NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio Another key feature of basins are the smooth floors left behind by pooled melted rock, or “impact melt.” When a typical crater forms, material that melted in the impact can be scattered and tossed out of the crater as ejecta. This impact melt can be visible at the surface, flowing down the slopes of the crater or draping features. It can also be found as tiny fragments in breccias. When a basin forms, some melted material also scatters, but the depth of the melting is so extensive ― kilometers to tens of kilometers deep ― that a substantial amount remains in the basin. In the case of the giant South Pole-Aitken Basin, the solidified impact melt sheet is thought to be 31 miles (50 km) thick. It can take millions of years for such deep pools of melted rock to cool, and during that time any new impactors will strike a thin crust over a thick layer of molten rock, leaving no craters behind and making the area appear young to observers. As these melt sheets cool and crystalize they contract, creating depressions in the centers of the basins. These depressions can remain visible even after they are covered by basalt deposits from later volcanic flows. Not all lunar basins are obvious. These maps made with Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter data show the location of the Nubium basin, which has become degraded over time. The color-coded map on the left helps show Nubium due to a slight depression easily seen in the topographic map. Parts of a rim structure can be identified in the southeast, suggesting a basin diameter of about 419 miles (675 km) (black dashed line), which is consistent with previous estimates of 428 miles (690 km) (gray dashed line). The model to the right accentuates the smooth floor of Nubium. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University/DLR This part of the interior of Orientale basin is thought to have a high proportion of material that was melted by the extreme shock pressures of the impact event that crated the basin, and the cracks seen here may have formed as the hot material, draped over underlying topography, cooled and shrank. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Writer: Tracy Vogel; Science Advisors: Daniel P. Moriarty (University of Maryland at College Park), Natalie M. Curran (NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center) Explore Further Expand your knowledge about lunar craters. Why Study Moon Craters? Lunar craters are about more than just the Moon. Read More What is the Late Heavy Bombardment? Lunar craters give scientists a peek into our solar system’s asteroid-pummeled past. Read More What is the South Pole-Aitken Basin? The Moon's largest basin holds many secrets. Read More The Explosive History of Orientale Basin The Moon’s Orientale basin demonstrates the violence of a tremendous lunar impact. Read More Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture. Artemis Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Skywatching

Earth's Moon Moon Phases 3 Quick Facts Moonrise and moonset times shift with the Moon phases. A full Moon rises at sunset; a new Moon is up all day. The Moon does not make its own light. "Moonlight" is actually reflected sunlight. The Moon is always half-lit by the Sun. Like Earth, it has a day side and a night side, which change as the Moon rotates. Contents Current Moon Phase All Moon Phases New Moon Waxing Crescent First Quarter Waxing Gibbous Full Moon Waning Gibbous Last Quarter Waning Crescent Our Wobbly Moon Earthshine Daytime Moons Overview From Space This graphic shows the position of the Moon and the Sun during each of the Moon’s phases and the Moon as it appears from Earth during each phase. Not to scale. NASA/JPL-Caltech In our entire solar system, the only object that shines with its own light is the Sun. That light always beams onto Earth and Moon from the direction of the Sun, illuminating half of our planet in its orbit and reflecting off the surface of the Moon to create moonlight . Sometimes the entire face of the Moon glows brightly. Other times we see only a thin crescent of light. Sometimes the Moon seems to disappear. These shifts are called Moon phases . The eight lunar phases are, in order: new Moon , waxing crescent , first quarter , waxing gibbous , full Moon , waning gibbous , third quarter , and waning crescent . The cycle repeats about once a month (every 29.5 days). Like Earth, the Moon has a day side and a night side, which change as the Moon rotates. The Sun always illuminates half of the Moon while the other half remains dark, but how much we are able to see of that illuminated half changes as the Moon travels through its orbit. Current Moon Phase Unable to render the provided source Daily Moon Guide: NASA's Interactive Map for Observing the Moon All Moon Phases Let’s take a look at the individual phases, and how the movements of the Moon and Sun appear to us as we watch from the Northern Hemisphere on Earth: New Moon This is the invisible phase of the Moon, with the illuminated side of the Moon facing the Sun and the night side facing Earth. In this phase, the Moon is in the same part of the sky as the Sun and rises and sets with the Sun. Not only is the illuminated side facing away from the Earth, it’s also up during the day! Remember, in this phase, the Moon doesn’t usually pass directly between Earth and the Sun, due to the inclination of the Moon’s orbit. It only passes near the Sun from our perspective on Earth. Waxing Crescent This silver sliver of a Moon occurs when the illuminated half of the Moon faces mostly away from Earth, with only a tiny portion visible to us from our planet. It grows daily as the Moon’s orbit carries the Moon’s dayside farther into view. Every day, the Moon rises a little bit later. First Quarter The Moon is now a quarter of the way through its monthly journey and you see half of its illuminated side. People may casually call this a half Moon, but remember, that’s not really what you’re witnessing in the sky. You’re seeing just a slice of the entire Moon ― half of the illuminated half. A first quarter Moon rises around midday and sets around the middle of the night. It’s high in the sky in the evening and makes for excellent viewing. Waxing Gibbous Now most of the Moon’s dayside has come into view, and the Moon appears brighter in the sky. Full Moon This is as close as we come to seeing the Sun’s illumination of the entire day side of the Moon (so, technically, this would be the real half moon). The Moon is opposite the Sun, as viewed from Earth, revealing the Moon’s dayside. A full Moon rises around sunset and sets around sunrise. The Moon will appear full for a couple of days before it moves into… Waning Gibbous As the Moon begins its journey back toward the Sun, the opposite side of the Moon now reflects the Moon’s light. The lighted side appears to shrink, but the Moon’s orbit is simply carrying it out of view from our perspective. The Moon rises later and later each night. Last Quarter The Moon looks like it’s half illuminated from the perspective of Earth, but really you’re seeing half of the half of the Moon that’s illuminated by the Sun ― or a quarter. A last quarter Moon, also known as a third quarter Moon, rises around the middle of the night and sets around midday. Waning Crescent The Moon is nearly back to the point in its orbit where its dayside directly faces the Sun, and all that we see from our perspective is a thin curve. Our Wobbly Moon When we think of the way the Moon seems to change over the course of a month, we think of phases. But frequent Moon observers know that the Moon also appears to twist, nod, and roll slightly during its journey across the sky, allowing us to peek around the Moon's shoulder and catch glimpses of the farside. This phenomenon is called libration. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This visualization of the Moon’s phases throughout the year 2021 also shows lunar libration, the apparent rolling motion that changes our view of the Moon slightly over time. NASA’s Science Visualization Studio. Because the Moon's orbit is not perfectly circular, its distance from Earth and its speed in orbit both change slightly throughout the month. The Moon’s rate of rotation around its own axis, though, always stays the same. When the Moon is at its closest to Earth and moving most quickly along its orbital path, the Moon itself doesn’t rotate quite fast enough to keep entirely the same side facing us, and we get to see a little more of the eastern side of the Moon. When the Moon is farthest from Earth and orbiting at its slowest, its rotation gets a little ahead, and we see a bit more of its western side. We call this motion “libration in longitude.” The 5 degree tilt of the Moon’s orbit also causes it to appear to nod, as though it were saying “yes.” The tilt sometimes brings the Moon above Earth’s northern hemisphere, and sometimes below Earth’s southern hemisphere, allowing us to see slightly more of the northern or southern hemispheres of the Moon. We call this motion “libration in latitude.” Finally, the Moon appears to tilt back and forth like a metronome. The tilt of the Moon’s orbit contributes to this, but it’s mostly due to the tilt of our Earth. Earth has a tilt of 23.5 degrees on its axis, which means that when we observe the Moon from Earth, it’s a little like we’re standing sideways on a ramp. If you look left, the ramp slopes up. If you look right, the ramp slopes down. In front of you, the horizon looks higher on the right and lower on the left. If you turn around, the horizon appears to tilt the opposite way. The tilted ramp works the same way as the tilted “platform” of the Earth beneath our feet. Every two weeks, we have to look in the opposite direction to see the Moon, and the ground beneath our feet is then tilted the opposite way as well. Earthshine Sometimes, when the Moon is in one of its crescent phases, we can still see the darkened area of the Moon’s nearside shining dimly. This effect is caused by the Sun’s light reflecting off Earth’s surface onto the face of the Moon. Because Earth at that point in its orbit is nearly full from the Moon’s perspective, the light it reflects, called earthshine, is bright enough to dimly illuminate the darkened surface. Though the Moon is in a crescent phase in this photograph, most of the darkened, Earth-facing side of the Moon is still dimly visible, illuminated by sunlight reflecting off our planet. This reflected light is called earthshine. Zolt Levay Daytime Moons Though the Moon is sometimes thought of as a nighttime visitor, it’s often visible during the day as a faint, pale presence. The waxing Moon rises over a ridge in the Wasatch Mountains, Utah. NASA/Bill Dunford The time of day at which the Moon is visible is related to its phase, the time of year, and your location on Earth. At most latitudes, the following patterns can help you roughly estimate when to expect moonrise and moonset during different Moon phases. For exact moonrise and moonset information, check local predictions. The waxing crescent Moon rises in the morning after the Sun is up, and sets at night after the Sun is down. The first quarter Moon rises around midday and sets around the middle of the night. The waxing gibbous Moon rises in the afternoon, before sunset, and sets in the early hours of the morning, before sunrise. The full Moon rises at sunset and sets at sunrise. The waning gibbous Moon rises at night, after sunset, and sets in the morning, after sunrise. The third quarter Moon rises around the middle of the night and sets around midday. The waning crescent Moon rises in the very early morning, before sunrise, and sets in the afternoon, before sunset. The new Moon rises and sets with the Sun, but is not visible in the daytime sky because the night side (unlit side) of the Moon faces towards Earth. Overview From Space Imagine you’re in a spaceship, traveling away from Earth. As you sail onward, you see our planet and its Moon locked together in their endless, circling, gravitational embrace. Your distant view gives you a unique perspective on the Moon that can be hard to visualize from the ground, where the Moon appears to sweep through the sky as an ever-changing globe of light. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video The Moon orbits Earth from a viewpoint above the North Pole in this animation. The blue gridlines show how the same side of the Moon always faces Earth. The size of the Earth and Moon are enlarged 20 times. Credit: NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio From your astronaut’s viewpoint, you can see that the Moon is an average of 238,855 miles (384,399 km) from Earth, or about the space that could be occupied by 30 Earths. It travels around our planet once every 27.322 days in an elliptical orbit, an elongated circle. (It takes about 27.3 days to complete a revolution, but 29.5 days to change from new moon to new moon.) The Moon is tidally locked with Earth, which means that it spins on its axis exactly once each time it orbits our planet. Because of this, people on Earth only ever see one side of the Moon. We call this motion synchronous rotation. Moon in Motion Tidal Locking The far side of the Moon can never be seen from Earth The Moon whirls around Earth with one side always facing our planet ― and it's not as unusual as you would think. Learn More about Tidal Locking The Moon's near side and far side. NASA LRO / Jatan Mehta Related Resources Daily Moon Guide NASA’s interactive map for observing the Moon each day of the year. Moon Observation Journal Spend the next month getting to know the Moon. Moon Phases, 2026 This visualization shows the Moon's phase at hourly intervals throughout 2026. Moon Phases, 2025 This visualization shows the Moon's phase at hourly intervals throughout 2025. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture. Artemis Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Skywatching

Earth's Moon Moon Formation Contents How did the Moon form? Written in Stone Lunar “Archaeology” Model Behavior Searching for the Past in the Future How did the Moon form? Earth’s Moon was born out of destruction. Several theories about our Moon’s formation vie for dominance, but almost all share that point in common: near the time of the solar system’s formation, about 4.5 billion years ago, something ― perhaps a single object the size of Mars, perhaps a series of objects ― crashed into the young Earth and flung enough molten and vaporized debris into space to create the Moon. Earth’s Moon is thought to have formed in a tremendous collision. A massive object ― named Theia after the mythological Greek Titan who was the mother of Selene, goddess of the Moon ― smashed into Earth, flinging material into space that became the Moon. NASA The early solar system would have been a chaotic, terrifying place. Debris left over from the formation of the Sun coalesced into a disk around the star, creating clumps that ranged in size from dust flecks to minor planets. Gravity drew these objects together, causing them to crash into each other ― violent smashups that could end in obliteration or new, larger objects. Those mashed-together objects make up the planets, moons, asteroids and other solar system objects we know today. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This animation shows how material around a young star is shaped into planets over billions of years. Credit: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center; Images courtesy of NASA/JPL-Caltech. Written in Stone Visiting the Moon with the Apollo missions in the late 1960s and early 1970s revolutionized our understanding of the Moon’s origins. Previous concepts ― that the Moon was an object captured by Earth’s gravity as it sailed by, or that the Moon formed alongside Earth from the same debris ― fell out of favor after the Apollo missions brought back data and 842 pounds (382 kilograms) of lunar samples to Earth. The Apollo evidence all pointed to the Moon forming from a large impact. The age of the rock samples indicated that the Moon formed around 60 million years after the solar system began to form. The type and composition of the samples showed that the Moon had been molten during its formation and was covered with a deep ocean of magma for tens of millions to hundreds of millions of years ― an environment that would occur in the aftermath of an intensely energetic impact. Lunar rocks were found to contain only small amounts of elements that vaporize when heated, further indicating the Moon could have formed in a high-energy impact that let those elements escape. Five Things We Learned from Apollo Moon Rocks The chemical composition of Moon and Earth rocks are very similar. The Moon was once covered in an ocean of magma. Meteorites have shattered and melted rocks on the Moon’s surface through impacts. Lava flowed up through cracks in the Moon’s crust and filled its impact basins. Lunar “soil” is made of pulverized rock created by meteorite impacts. Scientist and astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt stands next to a huge, split lunar boulder during the Apollo 17 mission at the Taurus-Littrow landing site in this photograph from Dec. 13, 1972. Rock samples collected during the Apollo missions provided evidence that the Moon resulted from an object crashing into Earth in the early history of the solar system. NASA/Eugene Cernan Perhaps most importantly, the rock samples indicated that the Moon was once a part of Earth. Basaltic rocks from the Moon’s mantle have striking similarities to basaltic rocks from Earth’s mantle. The oxygen isotopes and other elements sealed into the specimens matched those of Earth rocks too precisely for the similarities to be a coincidence. Meteorites make up another body of evidence. Samples collected by Apollo astronauts come from just a few sites on the Moon, but lunar meteorites ― rocks sent into space by impacts on the Moon that eventually find their way to Earth ― provide samples from all over the Moon that tell a similar tale of the Moon’s history. Meteorites originating from asteroids have also been used to help confirm the timeline of the Moon’s formation. Some show signs of having been bombarded by debris from the giant, Moon-forming impact. Finally, more recent studies add the evidence for a high-energy impact that resulted in the creation of a molten Moon. Analysis of light reflecting off the Moon gives details of the mineral makeup of the Moon’s surface, and it shows the widespread presence of anorthosite, an igneous rock that crystallizes out of and floats to the top of magma. The presence of anorthosite across the Moon’s surface reinforces that the Moon must once have been covered by a widespread magma ocean that was quite deep, from hundreds to thousands of kilometers. This light-colored mineral, Apollo mission lunar sample 60639 , is thought to have floated to the top of the magma ocean and formed the Moon’s first crust around 4.4 billion years ago. Credit: NASA/Erika Blumenfeld & Joseph Aebersold Lunar “Archaeology” Though Earth and Moon both came from that ancient collision ― and Earth is certainly within easier reach ― studying the Moon gives us our best chance of understanding what happened all those billions of years ago. Earth’s active geological processes, from plate tectonics to erosion, erase the evidence of formation. Aside from events like impacts, much of the Moon’s surface changes on a vastly slower timescale. Like detectives at a crime scene, scientists use clues preserved on the lunar surface to piece together the Moon’s history. Any improvements to the giant impact theory or a new theory would need to explain what we observe of the Moon today. One of the oddities is the Moon’s low iron content as compared with Earth’s. Earth’s iron-rich core accounts for around 30 percent of its mass, but the core of the Moon is only about 1.6-1.8 percent of its total mass. One possible explanation is that the energy of the impact with Earth that formed the Moon vaporized lighter materials, casting them into space, and left behind heavier elements ― such as iron, which vaporizes only at extremely high temperatures ― to sink into Earth’s core. This diagram shows a cross-section of the Moon’s interior during its early history, including the silicate mantle and a small metallic core. The lunar mantle is low in the elements 14 zinc, tin, cadmium, indium, and thulium, possibly because they never recondensed from gas form after the collision that created the Moon. Illustration courtesy of NASA/JPL-Caltech Any viable theory of lunar formation also has to explain where the Moon is now in relation to Earth and the speed and inclination of its orbit. Surface reflectors placed on the Moon during Apollo show that the Moon moves away from Earth at the rate of about an inch and a half per year. This indicates that the Moon initially formed much closer to our planet, and, therefore, that the early Earth’s spin rate was much higher than it is today. Computer models created by scientists to test and analyze Moon formation theories must show how a massive collision can produce the existing orbits and rotation of Moon and Earth over billions of years when paired with the typical gravitational interactions between the two bodies. (Even today, the distance between the Earth and Moon, and the length of a day on Earth, continues to grow due to the effects of Earth’s tides .) Finally, strange discrepancies exist between the Moon’s near and far sides. Differences include: the thickness of the crust ― 43 miles (70 kilometers) on the Moon's near-side versus 93 miles (150 kilometers) on the far side; the contrasting geological makeup, including a concentration of radioactive elements on the near side; and the rich history of volcanism on the near side compared with a relative lack of volcanic activity on the far side. How closely these differences are related to the Moon’s formation ― how it cooled, how its volcanic activity took place, and the manner in which it has been bombarded by objects from space ― is a question scientists continue to wrestle with today. The Moon's near side and far side. NASA LRO / Jatan Mehta Model Behavior With humanity’s return to the Moon through the Artemis program, scientists expect a flood of new information that will help us hone in on a single formation scenario. In the meantime, scientists continue to study existing samples and other information they have now ― such as information from lunar orbiters and the growing body of knowledge on planetary formation ― to construct computer models that help us understand how the collision might have happened, and how it could have resulted in the Moon and Earth as we see them today. The models account for factors like the strength of the colliding objects, the friction between the components, the density of the components, and how materials behave under different temperatures and pressures. Today’s advanced computer models can provide a number of very specific outcomes based on variables like these. A NASA and Durham University simulation theorizes that the Moon may have formed in a matter of hours, when material from the Earth and a Mars sized-body were launched directly into orbit after the impact. The simulations used in this research are some of the most detailed of their kind, operating at the highest resolution of any simulation run to study the Moon’s origins or other giant impacts. NASA's Ames Research Center For instance, when scientists want to figure out why the Moon is low in certain elements that vaporize easily, they use models to see how the Moon’s composition would look if the elements were lost, or depleted, during different periods of the Moon’s formation. Perhaps the environment in which the Moon formed or early eruptions on the Moon’s surface created a temporary atmosphere that led to the elimination of some of those elements, or they may have been released through interactions with the heat of the Sun or a bright and still-molten Earth. Even these complex models can’t simulate every atom in a massive collision between giant objects that kicks debris into space. But astronomers can represent larger groups of debris by using particles whose properties depend on where they are located during the collision, like hot material situated near the proto-Moon’s core. Astronomers are able to alter the properties in their models to produce different results, showing how even small changes can produce different scenarios. As evidence continues to come in, the eventual goal is a comprehensive model that accounts for everything we know about the Moon. Searching for the Past in the Future The final Apollo Moon mission was in 1972. Scientists have had decades to investigate lunar samples and data from the Apollo missions, combine it with information returned by subsequent lunar missions, come to conclusions, and form new questions. They know what to target during the upcoming Artemis missions to help solve some of the outstanding mysteries. All of the Apollo missions landed near the Moon’s equator, and the samples brought back are mostly from volcanic regions. Lunar scientists are hoping to obtain new samples from different locations, like the far side of the Moon and areas closer to the poles, so they can examine the Moon’s composition in regions that would have evolved in different ways and uncover more evidence of how the Moon formed. They’re hoping to drill down into the lunar surface and acquire core samples that expose additional layers of the Moon’s geologic history, a record written in rock and mostly hidden from us for now. These new discoveries will help narrow down the many unknown factors in the Moon formation models. If the new evidence shows ― to choose just one example ― that a vast quantity of sulfur was lost during a period of volcanic activity, then that sulfur loss doesn’t need to be accounted for during early stages of Moon formation. Like a game of Clue, deciphering the mysteries of the Moon’s formation will be a process of elimination, ruling out particular events happening during certain time periods and narrowing down the possibilities until few remain. But scientists are also alert to the possibility of new discoveries, findings that paint a different picture. The greatest clues to the Moon’s past may still be scattered around and beneath the lunar surface, waiting to be unearthed. Writer: Tracy Vogel Science Advisors: Prabal Saxena (NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center), Sarah Valencia (NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center) and Bill Bottke (Southwest Research Institute Boulder) Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture. Artemis Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Skywatching

Earth's Moon Water & Ices on the Moon Contents Maria on the Moon (1645) Totally Dry Moon (1892) Ideas of Water (1960s) Apollo Landings (1969 – 1972) Possible Frozen Water in Shadowed Craters (1994, 1998) Revisiting Apollo Samples (2008) Signs of Hydration (2009) Chandrayaan, Cassini, Deep Impact Observations of Lunar Debris Reveal More (2009 – 2019) Confirmation of Moon Water – Shadowed Regions (2018) Confirmation of Moon Water – Sunlit Surface (2020) First Detailed, Wide-Area Map of Water on the Moon (2023) More to Discover What’s big, covered in water, yet 100 times drier than the Sahara Desert? It’s not a riddle, it’s the Moon! For centuries, astronomers debated whether water exists on Earth’s closest neighbor. In 2020, data from NASA’s SOFIA mission confirmed water exists in the sunlit area of the lunar surface as molecules of H 2 O embedded within, or perhaps sticking to the surface of, grains of lunar dust. Here is a brief history of the discoveries leading up to the confirmation of water on the Moon. Maria on the Moon (1645) When early astronomers looked up at the Moon, they were struck by the large, dark spots on its surface. In 1645, Dutch astronomer Michael van Langren published the first-known map of the Moon referring to the dark spots as “maria” – the Latin word for “seas” – and putting into writing the widely-held view that the marks were oceans on the lunar surface. Similar maps from Johannes Hevelius (1647), Giovanni Riccioli and Francesco Grimaldi (1651) were published over the next few years. We now know these spots to be plains of basalt created by early volcanic eruptions, but the nomenclature of ‘maria’ (plural) or ‘mare’ (singular) remains. A map of the Moon, featuring the maria depicted as oceans, published by astronomer Michael Van Langren in 1645. Creative Commons Totally Dry Moon (1892) American astronomer William Pickering made measurements in the late 1800s that led him to conclude the Moon essentially has no atmosphere. With no clouds and no atmosphere, scientists generally agreed that any water on the lunar surface would evaporate immediately. Pickering’s measurements led to a widespread view that the Moon was devoid of water. An open page of astronomer William Pickering’s book “The Moon: A Summary of Our Satellite with a Complete Photographic Atlas.” Pickering’s observations of the Moon lead to the belief that with such little atmospheric pressure, any ice on the lunar surface would near instantly sublimate. Internet Archive/Knopf Doubleday (This image is in the public domain) Ideas of Water (1960s) As scientists made headway in understanding the behavior of substances that are prone to vaporize at relatively low temperatures – called volatiles – theoretical physicist Kenneth Watson published a paper in 1961 describing how a substance like water could exist on the Moon. Watson’s paper first popularized the idea that water ice could stick to the bottom of craters on the Moon that never receive light from the Sun, while sunlit areas on the Moon would be so hot that water would evaporate near-instantly. These lightless areas of the Moon are called “permanently shadowed regions.” The Shackleton Crater at the Moon’s south pole in a permanently shadowed region of the Moon. NASA Apollo Landings (1969 – 1972) The Apollo era brought humans to the lunar surface for the very first time, giving researchers the opportunity to directly look for signs of water on the Moon. When tested, soil samples brought back by Apollo astronauts revealed no sign of water. Scientists concluded that the lunar surface must be completely dry, and the prospect of water wasn’t seriously considered again for decades. Apollo 17 astronaut Eugene Cernan drives the Lunar Roving Vehicle. NASA Apollo 15 astronaut Jim Irwin uses a scoop to collect soil samples on the lunar surface. NASA Possible Frozen Water in Shadowed Craters (1994, 1998) NASA’s Clementine mission launched in 1994 to orbit the Moon for two months and collect information about its minerals. Clementine data suggested there was ice in a permanently shadowed region of the Moon. The Lunar Prospector Mission focused on permanently shadowed craters to look deeper into the discovery and in 1998 found that the largest concentrations of hydrogen exist in the areas of the lunar surface that are never exposed to sunlight. The results indicated water ice at the lunar poles. However, the images were low resolution so no strong conclusions could be made. A mosaic image of the south pole of the Moon as taken by NASA’s Clementine spacecraft. NASA/JPL/USGS Revisiting Apollo Samples (2008) Capitalizing on major advances in technology since the Apollo era, researchers from Brown University revisited the Apollo samples. They found hydrogen inside tiny beads of volcanic glass. Since no volcanoes are erupting on the Moon today, the discovery presented evidence that water had existed in the Moon when the volcanoes erupted in the Moon’s ancient past. Additionally, the preserved hydrogen provided clues to the origins of lunar water: if it emerged from erupting volcanoes, it must have come from within the Moon. The discovery suggested that water was a part of the Moon since its early existence – and perhaps since it first formed. Apollo 17 astronaut Eugene Cernan preparing to collect samples. NASA Glass beads produced by ancient volcanic eruptions on the Moon and collected by Apollo astronauts. NASA Signs of Hydration (2009) Chandrayaan, Cassini, Deep Impact A suite of spacecraft enabled exciting discoveries in 2009. None were designed to look for water on the Moon, yet the Indian Space Research Organization’s Chandrayaan-1 and NASA’s Cassini and Deep Impact missions detected signs of hydrated minerals in the form of oxygen and hydrogen molecules in sunlit areas of the Moon. Researchers couldn’t determine whether they were seeing hydration by hydroxyl (OH) or water (H 2 O). They also debated whether the amount of hydration depended on the time of day. Artist’s depiction of NASA’s Cassini spacecraft. NASA/JPL-Caltech Observations of Lunar Debris Reveal More (2009 – 2019) The Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) spacecraft and Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) launched together in 2009. Later that year, LCROSS intentionally discharged a projectile into a crater believed to contain water ice, and flew through the debris from the projectile’s impact. Four minutes later, LCROSS itself intentionally impacted the Moon while LRO observed. The combined observations showed grains of water ice in the ejected material . The LRO and LCROSS findings added to a growing body of evidence that water exists on the Moon in the form of ice within permanently shadowed regions. LRO continues to orbit the Moon and provide data used to characterize and map lunar resources, including hydrogen. Artist rendering of the LCROSS satellite. NASA/JPL Areas of the Moon’s south pole with possible deposits of water ice, shown in blue. The map is based on data taken by NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter. NASA Confirmation of Moon Water – Shadowed Regions (2018) Data from Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3), carried by ISRO's Chandrayaan-1, provided scientists with the first high-resolution map of the minerals that make up the lunar surface. The NASA instrument flew aboard India’s Chandrayaan-1 mission in 2009. An analysis of the full set of data from M3, announced in 2018, revealed multiple confirmed locations of water ice in permanently shadowed regions of the Moon. A composite image using data from NASA’s Moon Mineralogy Mapper. The blue shows areas of confirmed water ice on the lunar surface. ISRO/NASA/JPL-Caltech/Brown University/USGS Confirmation of Moon Water – Sunlit Surface (2020) In 2020, NASA announced the discovery of water on the sunlit surface of the Moon. Data from the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA), revealed that in Clavius crater, water exists in concentrations roughly equivalent to a 12-ounce bottle of water within a cubic meter of soil across the lunar surface. The discovery showed that water could be distributed across the lunar surface, even on sunlit portions, and not confined to cold, dark areas. An illustration of H 2 O molecules on the lunar surface. NASA’s SOFIA confirmed the existence of water on the sunlit surface of the Moon in 2020. NASA First Detailed, Wide-Area Map of Water on the Moon (2023) In 2023, a new map of water distribution on the Moon provided hints about how water may be moving across the Moon’s surface. The map, made using SOFIA data, extends to the Moon’s South Pole – the intended region of study for NASA’s Artemis missions, and the water-hunting rover, VIPER. More to Discover Researchers have confirmed that water exists both in the sunlit and shadowed surfaces of the Moon, yet many questions remain. Lunar scientists continue to investigate the origins of water and its behavior. There is evidence that the water on the Moon comes from ancient and current comet impacts, icy micrometeorites colliding on the lunar surface, and lunar dust interactions with the solar wind. However, more research is needed to understand the full history, present, and future of water on the Moon. Writer: Allison Gasparini and Molly Wasser Science Advisors: Casey Honniball, Tim Livengood, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Explore in Depth Water Released from Moon In 2019, scientists discovered that water is being released from the Moon during meteor showers. Watch the video. How Ingredients for Water Could be Made on the Surface of the Moon Water on the Moon could come from a surprising source, our Sun. SOFIA Discovers Water on Sunlit Surface of Moon In 2020, NASA scientists confirmed the presence of water on the Moon. Latest News More Moon News & Features Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Article 3 Min Read NASA Will Attempt to Observe Rocket Part’s Lunar Impact 63 Min Read Artemis II Lunar Science 4 Min Read Johnson’s Cindy Evans Prepares Artemis Teams for Lunar Science Article 2 Min Read Artemis II Flight Day 7: Crew Makes Long‑Distance Call, Begins Return Blog Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture. Artemis Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Skywatching

Earth's Moon Moon Dust We can learn a lot from studying Moon dust—and, the Moon's powdery surface presents challenges for human and robotic explorers. Moon dust is part of the lunar regolith , the dusty, rocky material that covers much of the Moon's surface. Scientists study lunar regolith to learn more about what the Moon is made of , how it formed , what has happened to it throughout our solar system's history, and how we can explore it safely. Moon dust can get everywhere—even inside of astronauts' lungs! The last humans to visit the Moon encountered a surprising hazard: "lunar hay fever", a respiratory response to breathing in dust from the regolith. Rovers, too, must account for the effects of Moon dust on their surface operations. The lunar regolith has much to teach us, and it requires special precautions to explore. Explore Moon Dust Stories 01 Leveraging Lunar Regolith to Further Space Exploration The tiny particles that make up Moon dust may be a challenge for astronauts to deal with, but they can also be an incredible resource. Explore A close-up view of an astronaut's boot print in the lunar soil, photographed with a 70mm lunar surface camera during the Apollo 11 extravehicular activity (EVA) on the Moon. NASA 02 Measuring Moon Dust to Fight Air Pollution Tech designed to protect astronaut health and critical technology from lunar dust is also helping to combat air pollution on Earth. This air-quality sensor system measures Moon dust, forest fire emissions, and more. Go While astronaut Gene Cernan was on the lunar surface during the Apollo 17 mission, his spacesuit collected loads of lunar dust. The gray, powdery substance stuck to the fabric and entered the capsule causing eye, nose, and throat irritation dubbed “lunar hay fever.” NASA 03 NASA’s Artemis Science Instrument Gets Tested in Moon-Like Sandbox Before going to the Moon, scientists test lunar tools and techniques on Earth. These researchers are observing how simulated Moon dust interacts with hardware being developed to fly to the Moon with Artemis III astronauts. Go Scientists and engineers tested NASA’s LEMS (Lunar Environment Monitoring Station) instrument suite in a “sandbox” of simulated Moon "soil." NASA 04 An Out-Of-This-World Problem Moon dust can be damaging to everything from lunar landers to spacesuits and human lungs if inhaled. To conduct extended human and robotic exploration on the Moon or Mars, we need to deal with dust. Go An artist's rendering of a NASA Artemis astronaut working on the Moon's surface. NASA 05 NASA Experiment Sheds Light on Highly Charged Moon Dust Solar wind and ultraviolet light deliver electric charge to the Moon. Researchers are studying data from a recent suborbital flight test to better understand charged lunar regolith, or Moon dust, as NASA prepares to send astronauts back to the lunar surface with the Artemis campaign. Go The New Shepard crew capsule descends under parachutes during its launch Tuesday, Dec. 19, 2023. Blue Origin Learn More What Is the Moon Made Of? The Moon has a core, mantle, and crust. Nearly the entire lunar surface is covered by a rubble pile of charcoal-gray, powdery, and rocky debris called the lunar regolith. Earth Soil vs. Lunar Regolith: What's the Difference? Here’s how Earth’s soil and lunar regolith are different, and how further studies of lunar regolith can benefit NASA’s Artemis missions and beyond. 9 Phenomena NASA Astronauts Will Encounter at Moon’s South Pole Sticky, razor-sharp, electrically charged dust... and more. NASA Technology Helps Guard Against Lunar Dust Defeating dust may be a small concern for most people on Earth, but for astronauts and spacecraft destined for the Moon or Mars, it is a significant hazard that must be mitigated. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Missions Humans in Space Climate Change Solar System

Earth's Moon Lunar Volcanism The Moon does not have erupting volcanoes today, but it was once flooded with flowing lava. The Moon began as a molten world. Though volcanoes are not erupting on the lunar surface now, signs of past volcanic activity (like caves, plains, and domes made of cooled lava) are widespread. Scientists investigate lunar geology, including past volcanism, to learn more about how our Moon formed —which helps us to understand how other rocky worlds form and change, too. Explore Lunar Volcanism Stories 01 New Evidence Adds to Findings Hinting at Network of Caves on Moon An international team of scientists using data from NASA’s LRO (Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter) has discovered evidence of caves beneath the Moon’s surface. Like “lava tubes” found here on Earth, scientists suspect that lunar caves formed when molten lava flowed beneath a field of cooled lava, or a crust formed over a river of lava, leaving a long, hollow tunnel. Go These images from NASA’s LRO spacecraft show a collection of pits detected on the Moon. Each image covers an area about 728 feet wide. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University 02 A Lunar Mystery: The Gruithuisen Domes The Gruithuisen Domes are a geologic puzzle. Based on early telescopic and spacecraft observations, these domes have long been suspected to be formed by a magma rich in silica, similar in composition to granite. Go The Gruithuisen Domes, imaged by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC). NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University 03 Compare Lava Landscapes on Earth and the Moon Similar locations on different worlds, called planetary analogs, help scientists to make sense of our solar system – and field research in Earth’s most otherworldly places bridges the gap between past and future exploration. Interactive Gallery Left: on Hawaiʻi’s Kilauea Volcano, researchers use aerial cameras and hand-held science instruments to characterize their surroundings. Right: An Apollo 15 astronaut at work near Hadley Rille on the Moon. NASA 04 Wrinkle Ridge in Mare Crisium Mare Crisium is a large, dark, basaltic plain on the Moon. Basaltic plains on the Moon were created by early volcanic eruptions. Mare Crisium was once flooded with basaltic lava, a dark, runny lava commonly found on Earth. Go A complex wrinkle ridge in Mare Crisium, imaged by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC). NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University Learn More 10 Cool Things NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter is Teaching Us About the Moon It's shrinking and quaking, and it had active volcanoes more recently than previously thought. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Missions Humans in Space Climate Change Solar System

Earth's Moon Tides 3 Quick Facts The Moon's gravity drives Earth's tides, but high tides don't line up exactly with the Moon's position. When you see the tide roll in or out, what you’re really seeing is a cycle of small changes in the distribution of our planet’s oceans. The gravitational pull between Earth and Moon slightly distorts the shapes of both worlds. Contents Did You Know?: Tides don’t align perfectly with the Moon. Here Comes The Sun What About the Moon? You walk along a beach, seashells, driftwood and seaweed left by the retreating tides at your feet. Look up at the Moon, and you’re seeing the main cause of the surge and retreat of oceans from our shores. As distant as the Moon may seem, its gravitational pull on Earth plays a huge role in the formation of tides. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Tides rise and fall in Acadia National Park. National Park Service When you see the tide roll in or out, what you’re really seeing is a cycle of small changes to the distribution of our planet’s oceans. As the Moon’s gravity tugs at Earth, it shifts Earth’s mass, distorting its shape ever so slightly into that of a football ― elongated at the equator and shortened at the poles. This effect on the solid Earth can be detected by scientific instruments, but we can watch the same changes to Earth’s oceans just by visiting the beach. The Moon and Earth exert a gravitational pull on each other. On Earth, the Moon’s gravitational pull causes the oceans to bulge out on both the side closest to the Moon and the side farthest from the Moon. These bulges create high tides. The low points are where low tides occur. (Graphic not to scale.) NASA/Vi Nguyen It might seem strange that the ocean would bulge on the side farthest from the Moon as well as the side closest to it. This happens because the Moon’s gravity affects the entire Earth, pulling at every point on our planet. The strongest pull occurs on the points closest to the Moon, and the weakest on the points farthest away, but every bit of water is affected. Now think about pouring a bucket of water out on a table. It’s easier to slide the water around on the table rather than lift it directly upwards. When the Moon’s gravity pulls at Earth, the water doesn’t float outward, it just gets pushed and squeezed around on the globe, directed by both gravitational pull and other forces, until it ultimately ends up bulging out on the side closest to the Moon and the side farthest away. The Moon’s gravitational pull on Earth, combined with other, tangential forces, causes Earth’s water to be redistributed, ultimately creating bulges of water on the side closest to the Moon and the side farthest from the Moon. (Graphic not to scale.) NASA/Vi Nguyen As Earth rotates within this layer of water, its landmasses pass through the two bulges. These bulges are Earth’s high tides. Most shorelines experience two high and low tides per day. One high tide to high tide cycle (or low tide to low tide cycle) takes a little over 12 hours. Rising and ebbing tides happen as Earth’s landmasses rotate through the tidal bulges created by the Moon’s gravitational pull. Our observer sees the tides rise when passing through the bulges, and fall when passing through the low points. Of course, in reality the Earth isn’t a smooth ball, so tides are also affected by the presence of continents, the shape of the Earth, the depth of the ocean in different locations, and more. The timing and heights of the tide near you will be affected by those additional elements. (Graphic not to scale.) NASA/Vi Nguyen Did You Know?: Tides don’t align perfectly with the Moon. Earth’s tidal bulges don’t line up exactly with the Moon’s position. Earth's spin carries the tidal bulge forward (Earth’s spin being much faster than the Moon's orbital period). This means that the high tide bulges are never directly lined up with the Moon, but a little ahead of it. (Graphic not to scale.) NASA/Vi Nguyen Can you easily predict the tides by following the path of the Moon? Not really! First of all, because the Moon is orbiting in the same direction as the Earth rotates, it takes extra time for any point on our planet to rotate and end up exactly below the Moon. The extra time is ~50 mins. And, the high tide bulges are never directly lined up with the Moon, but a little ahead of it. In addition, Earth isn’t a perfect, smooth sphere. The tides we actually see at our shores are affected by everything from the shape of Earth’s continents to wind and storms. To get a true estimate of the tides near you, you’ll have to check the local tides forecast. Here Comes The Sun Now, the Moon is the biggest influence on Earth’s tides because of its proximity ― but it isn’t the only influence. The Sun ― with about 27 million times the mass of the Moon ― is always the gorilla in the room when it comes to solar system equations. But it’s a distant gorilla, about 390 times farther away than the Moon, which gives it a little less than half of the Moon’s tide-generating force. Yet it still plays a role. Twice a month, when the Earth, Sun, and Moon line up, their gravitational power combines to make exceptionally high tides where the bulges occur, called spring tides, as well as very low tides where the water has been displaced. About a week later, when the Sun and Moon are at right angles to each other, the Sun’s gravitational pull works against the Moon’s gravitational tug and partially cancels it out, creating the moderate tides called neap tides. You can tell when a spring tide or neap tide is happening without being anywhere near the water. Spring tides always happen when the Moon is at the full or new phase, which is when the Sun, Moon and Earth are in alignment. Neap tides occur around the first and last quarter phase of the Moon , when the Moon’s orbit around Earth brings it perpendicular to the Sun. Twice a month, when the Earth, Sun, and Moon line up, their gravitational power combines to make exceptionally high tides, called spring tides, as well as very low tides where the water has been displaced. When the Sun is at a right angle to the Moon, moderate tides, called neap tides, result. From our view on Earth, these tides coincide with certain lunar phases since they occur when the Moon reaches specific positions in its orbit. (Graphic not to scale.) NASA/Vi Nguyen What About the Moon? We’ve talked a lot about the effect of the Moon’s gravitational pull on Earth. But what about Earth’s much bigger gravitational influence on the Moon? After all, Earth has 80 times the Moon’s mass. Well, just as the Moon’s pull slightly distorts Earth’s sphere, Earth’s gravity slightly deforms the Moon. It’s not as dramatic as the ocean tides ― think of it as the difference between trying to squish a balloon filled with water and a balloon filled with sand ― but these tides on the Moon are measurable using lasers, and in some cases their effects are visible. Young cliffs on the Moon, called lobate scarps, form due to the combined forces of Earth’s gravity pulling on the lunar surface and the Moon's contraction as its hot interior cools. Sometimes, the contraction causes the Moon’s crust to buckle as it's pushed together and upwards, forming cliffs. Thousands of young, lobate scarps have been revealed in Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera images like the one at right. Even the routine effects of Earth’s gravitational pull on the Moon must be accounted for in the work of astronomers who bounce lasers off either the bare lunar surface or special reflectors positioned on the Moon to make extremely precise measurements. Earth’s gravitational tide can cause a change of about 4-6 inches (10-15 cm) to the Moon’s surface, so the reflection points rise and fall with the tides. Lobate scarps are like stair-steps in the landscape formed when the Moon’s crust is squeezed together, breaks, and is pushed upward to create a cliff. Patterns observed in the orientation of these scarps indicate that Earth’s gravitational pull contributes to the cracks' formation. NASA/LRO/Arizona State University/Smithsonian Institution This video, created using data from NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, displays a small complex of lobate scarps, part of a string of similar scarps that stretches across the lunar farside craters d'Alembert and Slipher. Writer: Tracy Vogel Graphic Designer: Vi Nguyen Science Advisors: Vishnu Viswanathan, Joseph Renaud, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA International Observe the Moon Night You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture. Artemis Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar… Skywatching

Earth's Moon Moon Stories Features Artemis II Crew Both Subjects and Scientists in NASA Deep Space Research With Artemis, NASA is taking the science of living and working in space beyond low Earth orbit, and getting to know the Moon better than ever before. Read More Moon Dust We can learn a lot from studying Moon dust—and, the Moon's powdery surface presents challenges for human and robotic explorers. Read More Lunar Volcanism The Moon does not have erupting volcanoes today, but it was once flooded with flowing lava. Read More News NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater 6 min read It started as a routine data-quality check. But as Robert Wagner, a scientist with NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), scanned a giant Moon map on his computer screen, an unusually large bright spot circled by a dark halo caught his… Article Celebrate International Observe the Moon Night with NASA 3 min read In April, the world watched as four humans circled the Moon for the first time in over 50 years with NASA’s Artemis II mission. On Saturday, Sept. 19, the public is invited to look up again with NASA events across… Article NASA, IBM Launch AI Foundation Model for Lunar Science 6 min read NASA is bringing artificial intelligence to the study of the Moon, helping researchers transform how they analyze the Moon’s surface. In an ongoing collaboration with IBM Research and several academic institutions, NASA has launched the NASA-IBM Lunar Foundation Model, among… Article What’s Up: September 2026 Skywatching Tips from NASA 3 min read Brilliant Venus and a Harvest Moon Use the Moon to find Antares and the Teapot, spot brilliant Venus, welcome the equinox, and see the Harvest Moon near Saturn and Neptune. Skywatching Highlights Transcript The Moon joins a tea party… Venus… Article Human-Related Microbes May Survive Moon’s South Pole, NASA Finds 5 min read Lee esta historia en español aquí. Some of Earth’s microbes likely to hitch a ride to space with human explorers could survive in the shaded nooks and crannies of the Moon’s South Pole region, NASA scientists say. Published on Aug.… Article NASA’s LRO Images Falcon 9 Crater on Moon, Learns New Details 3 min read Between Aug. 11 and 12, NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) captured a series of images of a new crater on the Moon. The crater formed on Aug. 5, when a SpaceX Falcon 9 upper stage impacted the surface following its… Article NASA Completes Astronaut-Deployed Science Instrument for Lunar Surface 5 min read NASA has declared “wrenches down” on the first completed payload designed for Artemis astronauts to deploy on the Moon’s surface. Engineers working on NASA’s Lunar Environment Monitoring Station, or LEMS, have completed hardware development and testing and the payload is… Article NASA’s CAPSTONE Completes Extended Mission Testing Lunar Technologies 5 min read As NASA prepares for a sustained human presence on the Moon, missions will increasingly require spacecraft that can navigate and communicate without a direct connection to Earth. NASA’s Cislunar Autonomous Positioning System Technology Operations and Navigation Experiment, or CAPSTONE, validated… Article What’s Up: July 2026 Skywatching Tips from NASA 3 min read A predawn Moon-and-planets meetup, a returning comet, a great chance to see the Milky Way, and Saturn’s rings at a new angle. Skywatching Highlights Transcript An early morning hangout with the Moon and planets, a comet swings by, prime time… Article NASA Testing Advanced Capabilities for Moon, Mars Rovers 6 min read On a bleak stretch of the Colorado Desert in Southern California, a compact four-wheeled rover recently trundled about 16 miles (26 kilometers) with minimal intervention from the team of engineers trailing it. Called ERNEST (Exploration Rover for Navigating Extreme Sloped… Article

Earth's Moon Moon Observation Journal May 29, 2024 Language english Spend the next month getting to know the Moon. Observe the Moon each day for a month. Write down the date and time you make each observation, and draw what you see. If you cannot see the Moon at all on a day, no matter when you look, indicate this in your journal and also write down why you could not see the Moon. Questions: Did the Moon look the same each day? If not, describe how it changed throughout the month. Did you see the Moon at the same time each day? Was there a pattern to the time when you were able to observe it? If so, describe the pattern. Did anything prevent you from being able to see the Moon this month? Could you still figure out what the Moon would have looked like if you could have seen it? If so, how? Look up information on the phases of the Moon and indicate in your Moon Observation Journal where you think the Moon most closely matched each of the following phases: Waxing Crescent, First Quarter, Waxing Gibbous, Full Moon, Waning Gibbous, Third Quarter , Waning Crescent , and New Moon . A solar eclipse occurs when the Sun, Moon, and Earth line up, with the Moon in between the Sun and Earth. This only happens during a new Moon phase. A lunar eclipse occurs when the Sun, Earth, and Moon line up, with the Earth in between the Sun and Moon. During what phase of the Moon could you see a lunar eclipse? What questions do you have about the Moon or eclipses? See if you can find answers and then share what you learn with your friends and family. Some places you can find information about the Moon and eclipses are: NASA’s Moon Site: science.nasa.gov/moon Lunar eclipses: science.nasa.gov/moon/eclipses Solar eclipses: science.nasa.gov/eclipses Downloads Moon Observation Journal Apr 24, 2026 PDF (92.24 KB)

Explore This Section Ceres Dwarf planet Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. It was explored by NASA's Dawn spacecraft. Facts Exploration Resources Ceres Facts Ceres is the only dwarf planet in the inner solar system. Ceres was the first member of the asteroid belt to be discovered when Giuseppe Piazzi spotted it in 1801. Called an asteroid for many years, Ceres is so much bigger and so different from its rocky neighbors that scientists classified it as a dwarf planet in 2006. When NASA's Dawn arrived in 2015, Ceres became the first dwarf planet to receive a visit from a spacecraft. Get the Facts Exploring Ceres Ceres was the first dwarf planet to be orbited by a spacecraft. NASA's Dawn spacecraft reached Ceres in 2015 to study its surface, composition, and history. This was three years after Dawn had orbited the asteroid Vesta, the second-largest body in the asteroid belt, behind Ceres. Explore Ceres NASA's Dawn spacecraft launches on Sept. 27, 2007. NASA Pluto and Dwarf Planet Resources A curated collection of resources about dwarf planets, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, printable graphics, and 3D models. Get Resources A composite image of the five dwarf planets recognized by the International Astronomical Union. NASA/JPL-Caltech Ceres News Article 2 Min Read Fluid Flow in Ceres Due to Core Heating Article 4 Min Read NASA: Ceres May Have Had Long-Standing Energy to Fuel Habitability 2 Min Read NASA’s Dawn Sees Crescent Ceres Image Article 23 Min Read How NASA Found the Ingredients for Life on an Asteroid 4 Min Read Lab Work Digs Into Gullies Seen on Giant Asteroid Vesta by NASA’s… Article Eyes on the Solar System: Ceres Unable to render the provided source Eyes of the Solar System uses data and images from NASA missions to give you a simulated view of Ceres. Learn More NASA's Dawn Mission The mission explored dwarf planet Ceres, and giant asteroid Vesta Pluto and Dwarf Planet Resources A curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, printable graphics, and 3D models. NASA's Photojournal Catalog of images, videos, and animations of dwarf planets. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Pluto Pluto was once our solar system's ninth planet, but has been reclassified as a dwarf planet. It's located in the Kuiper Belt. Facts Exploration Moons Resources Pluto Facts Pluto is a dwarf planet located in a distant region of our solar system beyond Neptune known as the Kuiper Belt. Pluto was long considered our ninth planet, but the International Astronomical Union reclassified Pluto as a dwarf planet in 2006. NASA's New Horizons was the first spacecraft to explore Pluto up close, flying by in 2015. Get the Facts Pluto nearly fills the frame in this image from NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft taken on July 13, 2015. NASA Exploring Pluto NASA's New Horizons was the first and, so far, the only mission to explore Pluto. New Horizons also was the first mission to explore the solar system's recently discovered "third zone," the region beyond the giant planets called the Kuiper Belt. More About Exploring Pluto An artist's concept of New Horizons at Pluto with its largest moon Charon in the background. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory/Southwest Research Institute Moons of Pluto Pluto has five moons. Pluto's largest moon, Charon, is about half the size of Pluto, making it the largest known moon relative to its parent planet in our solar system. Pluto's other moons are: Styx, Nix, Kerberos, and Hydra Learn About Pluto's Moons This composite image shows edge of Pluto's largest moon, Charon, with Pluto's four smaller moons above it. NASA/JHUAPL/SwRI Pluto and Dwarf Planet Resources A curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, printable graphics, and 3D models. Learn More A composite image showing the five dwarf planets recognized by the International Astronomical Union. NASA/JPL-Caltech Pluto News Blog 2 Min Read NASA’s New Horizons Finds Evidence of Recent Liquid on Pluto’s Surface Article 3 Min Read NASA’s New Horizons Spacecraft Wakes from Hibernation in Good Health 3 Min Read NASA’s New Horizons Enters Mission’s Longest Hibernation Period Blog 1 Min Read 10 Years Ago: NASA’s New Horizons Captures Pluto’s Heart Image Article 3 Min Read NASA’s New Horizons to Continue Exploring Outer Solar System Article Eyes on the Solar System: Pluto Unable to render the provided source Eyes of the Solar System uses data and images from NASA missions to give you a simulated view of Pluto. Learn More For Kids: All About Pluto Facts about Pluto for kids. Pluto and Dwarf Planet Resources A curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, printable graphics, and 3D models. NASA Photojournal: Pluto Images of Pluto. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Planets Pluto & Dwarf Planets Eris Charon

Explore This Section Dwarf Planets Haumea Facts Dwarf planet Haumea was originally designated 2003 EL61 (and nicknamed Santa by one discovery team). Haumea is located in the Kuiper Belts, a doughnut-shaped region of icy bodies beyond the orbit of Neptune. Introduction Namesake Potential for Life Size and Distance Orbit and Rotation Moons Rings Formation Structure Surface Atmosphere Magnetosphere Introduction Unable to render the provided source Eyes of the Solar System uses data and images from NASA missions to give you a simulated view of Haumea. Haumea is an oval-shaped dwarf planet that is one of the fastest rotating large objects in our solar system. The fast spin distorts Haumea's shape, making this dwarf planet look like a football. Namesake Two teams claim credit for discovering Haumea citing evidence from observations made in 2003 and 2004 . The International Astronomical Union’s Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature lists the discovery location as Sierra Nevada Observatory in Spain on March 7, 2003, but no official discoverer is listed. Haumea is named after the Hawaiian goddess of fertility. Potential for Life Haumea is extremely cold and doesn't appear to have conditions suitable for life. Size and Distance With an equatorial diameter of about 1,080 miles (about 1,740 kilometers), Haumea is about 1/7 the width of Earth. If Earth were the size of a nickel, Haumea would be about as big as a sesame seed. From an average distance of 4 billion miles (6.5 billion kilometers), Haumea is 43 astronomical units away from the Sun. One astronomical unit (abbreviated as AU), is the distance from the Sun to Earth. From this distance, it takes sunlight 6 hours to travel from the Sun to Haumea. O rbit and Rotation Haumea takes 285 Earth years to make one trip around the Sun. As Haumea orbits the Sun, it completes one rotation every 4 hours, making it one of the fastest rotating large objects in our solar system. It is possible that a large object impacted Haumea billions of years ago and set off Haumea's spin and created its moons. Moons Haumea has two known moons: Namaka is the inner moon, and Hi'iaka is the outer moon. Both were discovered in 2005 and named for the mythological daughters of Haumea. Hi'iaka is the patron goddess of the island of Hawaii and of hula dancers. Namaka is a water spirit in Hawaiian mythology. Rings Haumea is the first known Kuiper Belt Object to have rings. Scientists announced the discovery in 2017 after watching the dwarf planet pass in front of a star. Formation Dwarf planet Haumea is a member of a group of objects that orbit in a disc-like zone beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper Belt. This distant realm is populated with thousands of miniature icy worlds which formed early in the history of our solar system about 4.5 billion years ago. These icy, rocky bodies are called Kuiper Belt objects, transneptunian objects, or plutoids. Structure Astronomers believe Haumea is made of rock with a coating of ice. Surface We know very little about Haumea's surface. Atmosphere We know very little about Haumea's atmosphere. Magnetosphere Scientists do not think Haumea has a magnetosphere. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Dwarf Planets Makemake Facts Dwarf planet Makemake – along with Pluto, Haumea, and Eris – is located in the Kuiper Belt, a donut-shaped region of icy bodies beyond the orbit of Neptune. Introduction Namesake Potential for Life Size and Distance Orbit and Rotation Moons Rings Formation Structure Surface Atmosphere Magnetosphere Introduction Unable to render the provided source Eyes of the Solar System uses data and images from NASA missions to give you a simulated view of Makemake. Makemake is slightly smaller than Pluto, and is the second-brightest object in the Kuiper Belt as seen from Earth while Pluto is the brightest. It takes about 305 Earth years for this dwarf planet to make one trip around the Sun. Makemake holds an important place in the history of solar system studies because it was one of the objects – along with Eris – whose discovery prompted the International Astronomical Union to reconsider the definition of a planet, and to create the new group of dwarf planets. Makemake was first observed in March 2005 by M.E. Brown, C.A. Trujillo, and D.L. Rabinowitz at the Palomar Observatory, California. Its unofficial codename was Easterbunny, Brown said, "in honor of the fact that it was discovered just a few days past Easter." Before this dwarf planet was confirmed, its provisional name was 2005 FY9. In 2016, NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope spotted a small, dark moon orbiting Makemake. Namesake Makemake was named after the Rapanui god of fertility. Potential for Life The surface of Makemake is extremely cold, so it seems unlikely that life could exist there. Size and Distance With a radius of approximately 444 miles (715 kilometers), Makemake is 1/9 the radius of Earth. If Earth were the size of a nickel, Makemake would be about as big as a mustard seed. From an average distance of 4,253,000,000 miles (6,847,000,000 kilometers), Makemake is 45.8 astronomical units away from the Sun. One astronomical unit (abbreviated as AU), is the distance from the Sun to Earth. From this distance, it takes sunlight 6 hours and 20 minutes to travel from the Sun to Makemake. Orbit and Rotation Makemake takes 305 Earth years to make one trip around the Sun. As Makemake orbits the Sun, it completes one rotation every 22 and a half hours, making its day length similar to Earth and Mars. Moons This Hubble image reveals the first moon ever discovered around dwarf planet Makemake. The tiny satellite, located just above Makemake in this image, is barely visible because it is almost lost in the glare of the very bright dwarf planet. Hubble’s sharp-eyed WFC3 made the observation in April 2015. NASA, ESA, and A. Parker and M. Buie (SwRI) Makemake has one provisional moon, S/2015 (136472) 1, and it's nicknamed MK 2. It is more than 1,300 times fainter than Makemake. MK 2 was seen approximately 13,000 miles from the dwarf planet, and its radius is estimated to be about 50 miles (80 kilometers). Rings There are no known rings around Makemake. Formation Dwarf planet Makemake is a member of a group of objects that orbit in a disc-like zone beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper Belt. This distant realm is populated with thousands of miniature icy worlds, which formed early in the history of our solar system about 4.5 billion years ago. These icy, rocky bodies are called Kuiper Belt objects, transneptunian objects, or plutoids. Structure Scientists know very little about Makemake's structure. Surface We can't see too many details of Makemake's surface from so far away, but it does appear to be a reddish-brownish color, similar to Pluto. Scientists have also detected frozen methane and ethane on its surface. In fact, pellets of frozen methane as big as half an inch (1 centimeter) in diameter may rest on Makemake's cold surface. Atmosphere Makemake may develop a very thin atmosphere, most likely made of nitrogen, near perihelion – when it is closest to the Sun. Magnetosphere Scientists do not know if Makemake has a magnetosphere. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Dwarf Planets Eris Eris is one of largest the dwarf planets in our solar system. It's about the same size as Pluto, but it's three times farther from the Sun. Introduction Namesake Potential for Life Size and Distance Orbit and Rotation Moons Rings Formation Structure Surface Atmosphere Magnetosphere Introduction Unable to render the provided source Eyes of the Solar System uses data and images from NASA missions to give you a simulated view of Eris. The discovery of Eris help trigger a debate in the scientific community that led to the International Astronomical Union's decision in 2006 to clarify the definition of a planet. Pluto, Eris, and other similar objects are now classified as dwarf planets. Eris was discovered on Jan. 5, 2005, from data obtained on Oct. 21, 2003, during a Palomar Observatory survey of the outer solar system by Mike Brown, a professor of planetary astronomy at the California Institute of Technology; Chad Trujillo of the Gemini Observatory; and David Rabinowitz of Yale University. Here are some key dates in the discovery of Eris: Jan 8, 2005: Scientists announce they have discovered a Pluto-sized world billions of miles beyond the orbit of Neptune. They nickname the tiny world Xena after a fictional television character. The discovery reignites a debate about the definition of a planet. Sep 2005: Scientists announce Xena has a tiny moon, which they nickname Gabriella after Xena's sidekick on a television show about a warrior princess. Aug 26, 2006: After months of debate about how to classify Eris, the International Astronomical Union votes to change the definition of a planet. The new ruling reclassifies Pluto as a dwarf planet and reduces the number of planets in the solar system to eight. Both Eris and the asteroid Ceres are also classified as dwarf planets. Sep 14, 2006: The International Astronomical Union (IAU) announces that the dwarf planet known as Xena will be called Eris, after the Greek goddess of discord. Eris's moon is named Dysnomia, the demon goddess of lawlessness and the daughter of Eris. This is fitting since the discovery of Eris led to the demotion of Pluto from planet to dwarf planet amidst continuing debate in the science community and the public. Namesake This image of dwarf planet Eris (also known as 2003 UB313 or Xena,) was taken using the Samuel Oschin Telescope at the Palomar Observatory. Originally designated 2003 UB 313 – and nicknamed for the television warrior Xena by its discovery team – Eris is named for the ancient Greek goddess of discord and strife. The name fits since Eris remains at the center of a scientific debate about the definition of a planet. Potential for Life The surface of Eris is extremely cold, so it seems unlikely that life could exist there. Size and Distance With an equatorial diameter of about 1,500 miles (2,400 kilometers), Eris is about 1/5 the width of Earth. Eris, like Pluto, is a little smaller than Earth's Moon. If the Earth were the size of a nickel, Eris would be about as big as a popcorn kernel. From an average distance of 6.3 billion miles (10 billion kilometers), Eris is about 68 astronomical units away from the Sun. One astronomical unit (abbreviated as AU), is the distance from the Sun to Earth. From this distance, it takes sunlight more than nine hours to travel from the Sun to the surface of Eris. Orbit and Rotation Eris takes 557 Earth years to make one trip around the Sun. The plane of Eris' orbit is well out of the plane of the solar system's planets and extends far beyond the Kuiper Belt, a zone of icy debris beyond the orbit of Neptune. As Eris orbits the Sun, it completes one rotation every 25.9 hours, making its day length similar to ours. Moons Eris has a very small moon called Dysnomia. Dysnomia has a nearly circular orbit lasting about 16 days. This moon is named after Eris' daughter, the demon goddess of lawlessness. Dysnomia and other small moons around planets and dwarf planets allow astronomers to calculate the mass of the parent body. Dysnomia plays a role in determining how comparable Pluto and Eris are to each other. Rings Eris has no known rings. Formation Dwarf planet Eris is a member of a group of objects that orbit in a disc-like zone beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper Belt. This distant realm is populated with thousands of miniature icy worlds, which formed early in the history of our solar system about 4.5 billion years ago. These icy, rocky bodies are called Kuiper Belt objects, transneptunian objects, or plutoids. Structure We know very little about Eris' internal structure. Surface Eris most likely has a rocky surface similar to Pluto. Scientists think surface temperatures vary from about -359 degrees Fahrenheit (-217 degrees Celsius) to -405 degrees Fahrenheit (-243 degrees Celsius). Atmosphere The dwarf planet is often so far from the Sun that its atmosphere collapses and freezes, falling to the surface as snow. As it gets closest to the Sun in its faraway orbit, the atmosphere thaws. Magnetosphere Nothing is known about Eris' magnetosphere. one of nine? more or less? What is a Planet? Pluto fans thought they knew. Then Eris entered the chat. Learn More This artist's rendering of Eris and its moon Dysnomia imagines the rest of the solar system as a distant, dusty disk. NASA/ESA/STScI Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Pluto and Dwarf Planet Resources Explore this page for a curated collection of resources, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, printable graphics, and 3D models. This resource package is suitable for educators, students, and anyone interested in learning more about dwarf planets! Discover Pluto and the Dwarf Planets In addition to the resources on this page, follow along with updates on Pluto and other dwarf planets through @NASASolarSystem on your preferred social media platform. Animations and Videos Images Activities Printable Graphics 3D Models NASA DWARF PLanets main page Dwarf Planets Learn more about Pluto and other dwarf planets, which are defined as objects that orbit the Sun and are nearly round, but that have not been able to clear their orbit of debris. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) has recognized five dwarf planets: Pluto, Ceres, Haumea, Makemake, and Eris. But there may be many more waiting to be discovered. Explore A composite image showing the five dwarf planets recognized by the International Astronomical Union. NASA/JPL-Caltech Animations and Videos Space Shorts: What is a Dwarf Planet? Discover what a dwarf planet is in this 60 second clip. Watch The Year of Pluto NASA's New Horizons spacecraft was the first to explore Pluto and Kuiper Belt object Arrokoth up close. This documentary explores how the mission came to be and why it matters. Watch New Horizons Flyover of Pluto Using New Horizons data and digital elevation models of Pluto, mission scientists created a flyover movie that offers spectacular perspectives of the many unusual features of Pluto – from a vantage point even closer than the spacecraft itself. Watch Reflections on Clyde Tombaugh Annette and Alden Tombaugh, the children of Clyde Tombaugh, remember their father and his discovery of Pluto. Watch Flight Over Dwarf Planet Ceres Take a flight over dwarf planet Ceres in this video made with images from NASA's Dawn spacecraft. Watch Bright Spots on Ceres More than 300 bright spots were located on the surface of dwarf planet Ceres by NASA's Dawn mission. Scientists believe that the bright material indicates the dwarf planet is an active, evolving world. Watch NASA's Dawn Spacecraft's Flight Over Occator Crater This video shows the intriguing Occator Crater on Ceres, home to the dwarf planet's brightest region. It may have been produced by upwelling of salt-rich liquids after the impact that formed the crater. Watch Moon Orbiting Dwarf Planet Makemake Astronomers using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope discovered a moon orbiting dwarf planet Makemake — the third largest known object past the orbit of Neptune, about two thirds the size of Pluto. Watch Photojournal Dwarf Planet Images A catalog of images, videos, and animations of the officially recognized dwarf planets in our solar system. Explore the Images Pluto nearly fills the frame in this image from the Long Range Reconnaissance Imager (LORRI) aboard NASA's New Horizons spacecraft. NASA/Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory/Southwest Research Institute Activities Model Solar System Bead Activity In this activity, you'll construct a scale model of the solar system using beads and string and will observe the relative distances of the planets, asteroid belt, and dwarf planet Pluto from one another and from the Sun. Explore Write a Poem About the Dwarf Planets In this activity, you'll learn about different kinds of poems and will discover how to create your own poetry inspired by space. Explore New Horizons Coloring Page Color Pluto, its giant moon Charon, and NASA's New Horizons spacecraft! Explore Printable Graphics Pluto Poster - Version A A color view of Pluto, as seen in July 2015 by NASA's New Horizons mission. Download Pluto Poster - Version B A look at the mountains and plains of Pluto, as seen in July 2015 by NASA's New Horizons mission. Download Pluto Poster - Version C Scientists with NASA's New Horizons mission used enhanced color images like the one in this poster to detect differences in the composition and texture of Pluto's surface. Download Ceres Poster - Version A In this poster, the dwarf planet Ceres is shown in a false-color rendering, which highlights differences in surface materials. Download Ceres Poster - Version B This poster shows a view of Ceres, taken by NASA's Dawn spacecraft in December 2015, of an area in the southern hemisphere of the dwarf planet. Download Ceres Poster - Version C NASA's Dawn spacecraft captured the view of Ceres shown in this poster in April 2015. Download 3D Models and Interactives Pluto 3D Model Check out this 3D model of Pluto. Explore New Horizons 3D Model A 3D model of NASA's New Horizons, a mission to Pluto and the Kuiper Belt. Explore Ceres 3D Model A 3D model of Ceres, a dwarf planet in the main asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. Explore Haumea 3D Model A 3D model of Haumea, a dwarf planet in the Kuiper Belt Explore Makemake 3D Model A 3D model of Makemake, a dwarf planet in the Kuiper Belt. Explore Eris 3D Model A 3D model of Eris, a dwarf planet in the Kuiper Belt. Explore NASA Solar System Treks: Ceres Check out these online portals and explore the surfaces of other worlds using real data returned from spacecraft. Visit Ceres now! Explore Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Solar System Resource Packages Science Missions Pluto & Dwarf Planets Charon

Photojournal Navigation Dwarf Planet Gallery Catalog of images, videos, and animations of Dwarf Planets. Latest Dwarf Planet Content Stay up-to-date with the latest content about Dwarf Planets from Photojournal Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Close-up of Occator Crater This view across the southeastern floor of the large Occator Crater on the dwarf planet Ceres is based on images… Aug 10, 2020 Highlighting Bright Areas of Ceres’ Occator Crater NASA's Dawn spacecraft captured pictures, which were combined to create this false-color view of a region in Occator Crater on… Aug 10, 2020 Dawn Stereo Anaglyph of Impact Melt Deposits at Occator Crater, Ceres This Dawn stereo anaglyph of Occator Crater on Ceres shows impact melt deposits draped on faulted blocks on the northeastern… Aug 10, 2020 Dawn Stereo Anaglyph of Hydrothermal Deposits at Occator Crater, Ceres This Dawn stereo anaglyph of Occator Crater on Ceres shows bright carbonate deposits draped on ridged impact melt deposits in… Aug 10, 2020 Dawn Stereo Anaglyph of Hydrothermal Pits and Domes in Occator Crater, Ceres This Dawn stereo anaglyph of Occator Crater on Ceres shows mounds and pits on the lobate impact melt deposits that… Aug 10, 2020 Dawn Stereo Anaglyph of Southeast Floor and Rim of Occator Crater, Ceres This Dawn stereo anaglyph of Occator Crater on Ceres shows impact melt deposits in the southeastern part of the 57-mile… Aug 10, 2020 View of Ceres’ Limb NASA's Dawn spacecraft captured this view of Ceres' limb on May 19, 2018. Jan 23, 2019 Dantu Crater This image shows the complex central construct and concentric fractures in the large Dantu Crater on Ceres, as obtained by… Dec 27, 2018 Haulani and Oxo Craters This image shows Haulani Crater and its bright ejecta near the limb of Ceres and Oxo Crater, as obtained by… Dec 27, 2018 Ezinu Crater This image, highlighting the complex set of fractures near the center of the large Ezinu Crater on Ceres, was obtained… Dec 27, 2018 Blocks Sliding Down Occator Crater’s Southeastern Wall This image of blocks sliding down Occator Crater's southeastern wall on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June… Dec 27, 2018 Stars in Occator Crater This image of the eastern part of Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 24,… Dec 27, 2018 Stars on Occator’s Floor This image montage of 'stars' found on the floor of Ceres' Occator Crater was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft in… Dec 27, 2018 Urvara Crater’s Central Ridge This close-up view of the central peak of the 99-mile-wide (160-kilometer-wide) Urvara impact crater on Ceres was captured by NASA's… Dec 11, 2018 Cerealia Facula Pit and Dome in 3-D This stereo view, called an anaglyph, of Cerealia Facula Pit and Dome on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft… Nov 15, 2018 Lava Flows on the Floor of Occator Crater (3-D) This stereo view, called an anaglyph, of lava flows on the floor of Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by… Nov 15, 2018 Cracks in the Floor of Occator Crater (3-D) This stereo view, called an anaglyph, of cracks in the floor of Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's… Nov 15, 2018 Bright and Dark Pattern on Occator Crater’s Floor (3-D) This stereo view, called an anaglyph, of Occator Crater's floor on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft from an… Nov 15, 2018 Occator’s “Mesa” in 3-D This stereo view, called an anaglyph, of Occator Crater's 'Mesa' on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft from an… Nov 15, 2018 Last Look: Ceres This image of Ceres and the bright regions in Occator Crater was one of the last views obtained by NASA's… Nov 1, 2018 Last Look: Ahuna Mons on Ceres This image of Ceres and one of its key landmarks, Ahuna Mons, was one of the last views obtained by… Nov 1, 2018 Occator Crater on Ceres’ Limb — Short Exposure This image of Occator Crater on Ceres' limb -- short exposure -- was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on August… Sep 26, 2018 Occator Crater on Ceres’ Limb — Long Exposure This image of Occator Crater on Ceres' limb -- long exposure -- was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on August… Sep 26, 2018 Mass Wasting Features Along Occator Crater’s Rim This image of mass wasting features along Occator Crater's rim on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on August… Sep 26, 2018 Deep Fractures in Occator Crater This image of deep fractures in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 31, 2018… Sep 26, 2018 Fracture Network on the Floor of Occator Crater This image of a fracture network on the floor of Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft… Sep 26, 2018 Fracture Pattern on the Floor of Occator Crater This image of a fracture pattern on the floor of Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft… Sep 26, 2018 Large Block Along the Ridge of Urvara Crater This image of a large block along the ridge of Urvara Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft… Sep 26, 2018 Base of Occator Crater’s Eastern Wall Next to the Vinalia Faculae This image of the base of Occator Crater's eastern wall next to the Vinalia Faculae on Ceres was obtained by… Sep 26, 2018 Complex Pattern on the Floor of Occator Crater This image of a complex pattern on the floor of Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft… Sep 26, 2018 Large Block Detached from Urvara Crater’s Rim This image of a detached large block from Urvara Crater's rim on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on… Sep 26, 2018 Boulders Along Urvara Crater’s Wall This image from NASA's Dawn spacecraft of boulders along Urvara Crater's wall was obtained from an altitude of about 28… Aug 24, 2018 Mosaic of Cerealia Facula This mosaic from NASA's Dawn spacecraft, of Cerealia Facula combines images obtained from altitudes as low as 22 miles (35… Aug 21, 2018 Ceres’ Internal Structure (Artist’s Concept) This artist's concept summarizes our understanding of how the inside of Ceres could be structured, based on the data returned… Aug 14, 2018 Detail of the Vinalia Faculae in Occator Crater This image showing detail of the Vinalia Faculae in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on… Jul 31, 2018 Landslides Along Occator Crater’s Wall This image of landslides along Occator Crater's wall on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 16, 2018… Jul 31, 2018 Lobate Flows on Occator Crater’s Floor This image of lobate flows on Occator Crater's floor on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 16,… Jul 31, 2018 Bright Crater on Ceres This image of a bright crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 17, 2018 from an… Jul 31, 2018 Scarp in Occator Crater This image of a scarp in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 3, 2018… Jul 31, 2018 Domes and Fractures in Occator Crater This image of domes and fractures in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 3,… Jul 31, 2018 Complex Bright and Dark Material Relationships in Occator Crater This image of complex bright and dark material relationships in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft… Jul 31, 2018 Fractures Across Occator Crater’s Floor This image of fractures across Occator Crater's floor on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 4, 2018… Jul 31, 2018 Urvara Crater’s Ridge This image of Urvara Crater's ridge on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 5, 2018 from an… Jul 31, 2018 Bright Spots in Small Crater on Ceres This image of bright spots in a small crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 1,… Jul 31, 2018 Fractures in Occator Crater This image of fractures in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 3, 2018 from… Jul 31, 2018 Occator Crater Wall This image of a wall on Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 5, 2018… Jul 31, 2018 Dome in Occator Crater This image of a dome in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 5, 2018… Jul 31, 2018 Complex Patterns on Occator Crater’s Floor This image of complex patterns on Occator Crater's floor on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 5,… Jul 31, 2018 Fracture Pattern Near Cerealia Facula This image of a fracture pattern near Cerealia Facula on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 5,… Jul 31, 2018 Bright Material in Occator Crater This image of bright material in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 5, 2018… Jul 31, 2018 Fractures in Occator Crater’s Floor This image of fractures in Occator Crater's floor on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 5, 2018… Jul 31, 2018 Detail of Urvara Crater’s Central Ridge This image showing detail of Urvara Crater's central ridge on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 6,… Jul 31, 2018 Vinalia Faculae Detail This image of Vinalia Faculae on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on July 6, 2018 from an altitude… Jul 31, 2018 Mosaic of the Vinalia Faculae in Occator Crater This close-up image of the Vinalia Faculae in Occator Crater on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft. The mapping… Jul 16, 2018 Mosaic of Cerealia Facula in Occator Crater This mosaic of Cerealia Facula in Occator Crater on Ceres is based on images obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft. Intimate… Jul 16, 2018 Vinalia Faculae Up Close This close-up image of the Vinalia Faculae in Occator Crater on Ceres, obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 14,… Jul 2, 2018 Prominent Mound in Ceres’ Cerealia Facula Region This mosaic of a prominent mound located on the western side of Cerealia Facula on Ceres was obtained by NASA's… Jul 2, 2018 Fracture Network in Occator Crater This image of Occator Crater's southeastern wall and floor on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 17,… Jun 26, 2018 Occator’s Northern Wall This image of Occator Crater's northern wall on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 16, 2018 from… Jun 26, 2018 Battered Crater Rim on Ceres This image of a battered crater rim on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 10, 2018 from… Jun 13, 2018 Boulders in Small Crater This image of a small boulder on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 10, 2018 from an… Jun 13, 2018 Occator Crater Eastern Rim This image of the eastern rim of Occator Crater was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 10, 2018 from… Jun 13, 2018 Small Crater North of Datan Crater This image of a small crater north of Ceres' Datan Crater was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 9,… Jun 13, 2018 Smooth Material on Ceres This image of smooth material on Ceres was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 9, 2018 from an altitude… Jun 13, 2018 Landslides Along Occator Crater’s Rim This image of landslides along Ceres' Occator Crater's eastern rim was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 9, 2018… Jun 13, 2018 Boulder Field Near Occator Crater’s Eastern Rim This image of a boulder field near Ceres' Occator Crater's eastern rim was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June… Jun 13, 2018 Occator Crater’s Eastern Rim This image of Ceres' Occator Crater's eastern rim was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 9, 2018 from an… Jun 13, 2018 Subtle Features on Ceres This image, obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on June 9, 2018, shows subtle features on Ceres from an altitude of… Jun 13, 2018 Limb View of Ceres This image of Ceres' limb was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on May 30, 2018 from an altitude of about… Jun 13, 2018 West of Haulani Crater This image of was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on May 30, 2018 from an altitude of about 420 miles… Jun 12, 2018 Complex Crater Assemblage on Ceres This image was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on May 30, 2018 from an altitude of about 465 miles (750… Jun 12, 2018 Two Giants Meet This image of the region between Urvara Crater's eastern rim and Yalode Crater's western rim was obtained by NASA's Dawn… Jun 12, 2018 Xevioso Crater This image of Xevioso Crater was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on May 16, 2018 from an altitude of about… Jun 12, 2018 Urvara Crater’s Complex Floor This image of Urvara Crater was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on May 20, 2018 from an altitude of about… Jun 5, 2018 Color Mosaic of Dantu Crater This color mosaic of Dantu Crater was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on May 23, 2018 from an altitude of… Jun 5, 2018 Juling Crater This image of Juling and Kupalo Craters was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on May 25, 2018 from an altitude… Jun 5, 2018 Nar Sulcus This image of Nar Sulcus in Yalode Crater was obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft on May 19, 2018 from an… Jun 5, 2018 Dawn: On its Way to Low Orbit On the way to its lowest-ever and final orbit, NASA's Dawn spacecraft is observing Ceres and returning new images of… May 31, 2018 Charon’s First Official Feature Names This annotated map projection from NASA's New Horizons spacecraft shows Charon, the largest of Pluto's five moons, annotated with its… Apr 11, 2018 Hanami Planum on Ceres This image from NASA's Dawn spacecraft showing the northern part of Hanami Planum on Ceres honors the Japanese cherry blossom… Mar 22, 2018 Juling Crater’s Floor This view from NASA's Dawn mission shows the floor of Ceres' Juling Crater. The crater floor shows evidence of the… Mar 14, 2018 Ahuna Mons This view from NASA's Dawn mission shows Ceres' tallest mountain, Ahuna Mons. A significant amount of sodium carbonate has been… Mar 14, 2018 Juling Crater’s Shadow This view from NASA's Dawn mission shows where ice has been detected in the northern wall of Ceres' Juling Crater,… Mar 14, 2018 Urvara and Yalode: Giant Craters on Ceres This image from NASA's Dawn spacecraft shows large craters Urvara (top) and Yalode (bottom) on dwarf planet Ceres. The two… Feb 22, 2018 Spiderweb-like Fractures in Occator Crater This image taken on August 17, 2016 from NASA's Dawn spacecraft shows a complex set of fractures found in the… Jan 30, 2018 Collage of Features on Ceres This collage shows some of the most interesting geological sites that NASA's Dawn spacecraft has revealed at dwarf planet Ceres. Jan 17, 2018 Kwanzaa Tholus This image obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft shows a subtle feature on Ceres called Kwanzaa Tholus. The rounded shape of… Dec 21, 2017 Kokopelli Crater on Ceres This image obtained by NASA's Dawn spacecraft shows a field of small craters next to Kokopelli Crater, seen at bottom… Dec 14, 2017 Map of Ceres’ Bright Spots This map from NASA's Dawn mission shows locations of bright material on dwarf planet Ceres. There are more than 300… Dec 12, 2017 Occator Perspective View This simulated perspective view from NASA's Dawn mission shows the bright areas of Occator Crater, which contains the brightest area… Dec 12, 2017 Duginavi and Oxo This image taken by NASA's Dawn spacecraft shows Duginavi Crater, a large crater on Ceres. Duginavi hosts the small Oxo… Dec 2, 2017 Samhain Catenae on Ceres This image made with data from NASA's Dawn spacecraft shows pit chains on dwarf planet Ceres called Samhain Catenae. Nov 9, 2017 Emesh Crater on Ceres This image taken by NASA's Dawn spacecraft shows Emesh, a crater on Ceres. Emesh, named after the Sumerian god of… Nov 2, 2017 Clues to Ceres’ Internal Structure NASA's Dawn spacecraft took these images of dwarf planet Ceres. The map overlaid on the right gives scientists hints about… Oct 26, 2017 ‘Rubber Duck’ on Ceres This image from NASA's Dawn spacecraft shows a group of craters, left of center, that resembles a rubber duck. The… Oct 12, 2017 Axomama Crater on Ceres This image from NASA's Dawn spacecraft highlights Axomama Crater, the small crater shown to the right of center; its sharp… Oct 6, 2017 Pluto’s Bladed Terrain Pluto's bladed terrain as seen from NASA's New Horizons during its July 2015 flyby. Sep 28, 2017 Pluto Topography and Composition Map These maps are from NASA's New Horizons' data on the topography (top) and composition (bottom) of Pluto's surface. In the… Sep 28, 2017 Xevioso Crater on Ceres NASA's Dawn spacecraft took this image of Xevioso Crater on Oct. 15, 2015. Xevioso is located in the vicinity of… Sep 26, 2017 High Resolution Ceres View This orthographic projection shows dwarf planet Ceres as seen by NASA's Dawn spacecraft. The projection is centered on Occator Crater,… Sep 20, 2017 Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Photojournal Photojournal Search Photojournal Photojournal’s Latest Content Feedback

Explore This Section Is Planet X Real? Introduction In January 2016, California Institute of Technology (Caltech) astronomers Konstantin Batygin and Mike Brown announced research that provided evidence for a planet about 1.5 times the size of Earth in the outer solar system. The existence of this distant world remains theoretical at this point. Batygin and Brown did not actually observe a planet. This hypothetical Neptune-sized planet would circle our Sun on a highly elongated path, far beyond Pluto. It could have a mass about 5 to 10 times that of Earth and orbit about 20 to 30 times farther from the Sun on average than Neptune. It would take between 10,000 and 20,000 Earth years to make one full orbit around the Sun. If it exists, this planet could help explain the unique orbits of some smaller objects in the distant Kuiper Belt , a region of icy debris that extends far beyond the orbit of Neptune. The existence of this far-off world rests on gravitational patterns in the outer solar system, and again — the planet remains theoretical at this point. Batygin and Brown nicknamed the hypothetical object “Planet Nine.” However, the notion of an undiscovered large planet in the realm beyond Neptune has been investigated multiple times in the past century, based on distinct lines of evidence. Sometimes it’s also referred to as “Planet X.” NASA does not take a position on the name used. The information on this page includes both names in the interest of helping the public to find it via online search. When was Planet X (Planet Nine) discovered? To be clear, Planet X (Planet Nine) has not yet been discovered, and there is debate in the scientific community about whether it exists. If the planet is found, what will it be called? As mentioned above, Batygin and Brown nicknamed their predicted object “Planet Nine,” but the formal naming rights of an object go to the person who actually discovers it. If the predicted world is found, the name must be approved by the International Astronomical Union . Planets are traditionally named for mythological Roman and Greek gods. Planet X, Planet Nine, and the Pluto Connection The names Planet X and Planet Nine are sometimes used interchangeably, but the term Planet X has been in use for more than a century. Planet Nine, meanwhile, refers to the prediction of a specific hypothesis published in 2016. The name Planet X was initially used for a hypothesis developed by astronomer Percival Lowell in 1915 to explain what might be perturbing the orbit of Uranus. The “X” is the letter x, not the Roman numeral for 10. Astronomers eventually determined that the perturbations to Uranus’ orbit were errors in measurement, and were not real. But the search for a giant, distant planet that Lowell kicked off led indirectly to the discovery of Pluto, in 1930. Pluto was considered the ninth major planet in our solar system until the definition of “planet” was changed by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) in 2016. This new definition reclassified Pluto as a dwarf planet. Even before the IAU action, back when it was discovered, it was thought that Pluto was as massive as Earth. As time went on, and more was learned about Pluto, scientists corrected the mistake. Because Pluto was now labeled a dwarf planet, and no longer considered our solar system’s ninth planet, Caltech astronomers referred to their hypothesized planet as Planet Nine when they announced it in 2016. What is the evidence for this planet? Astronomers studying the Kuiper Belt have noticed some of the dwarf planets and other small, icy objects in that region tend to follow orbits that cluster together. By analyzing these orbits, the Caltech team predicted the possibility that a large, previously undiscovered planet may be hiding far beyond Pluto. They proposed that gravitational interactions with a potential giant planet might explain the unusual orbits of those Kuiper objects. How would the discovery of this planet impact our understanding of the solar system? It could help explain: 1. Why long-period objects in the Kuiper Belt are, on average, tilted by about 20 degrees with respect to the plane within which the planets orbit the Sun 2. Why these long-period orbits cluster in their orientations 3. Why the solar system hosts a distant population of highly inclined trans-Neptunian bodies 4. The existence of objects that reside between the giant planets and orbit the Sun in a retrograde direction 5. The persistence of long-period Kuiper Belt objects whose orbits cross the orbit of Neptune It could also make our solar system seem a little more “normal.” Surveys of planets around other stars in our galaxy have found the most common types to be “super Earths” and their cousins — bigger than Earth, but smaller than Neptune. Yet none of this kind exist in our solar system. Planet Nine would help fill that gap. What’s next in the search for Planet X (Planet Nine)? Some of the world's most powerful telescopes, including the Hawaii-based Keck and Subaru telescopes, are searching for the planet. A NASA-funded citizen science project called Backyard Worlds: Planet 9 , encourages the public to help search using images captured by NASA's Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) mission. WISE surveyed the full sky in four infrared wavelength bands. (WISE was renamed and repurposed as NEOWISE in 2013 to hunt for near-Earth asteroids and comets. Its mission ended on July 31, 2024). A new observatory also may help in the hunt for Planet 9 — the Rubin Observatory on top of Cerro Pachón, a mountain in Northern Chile. The observatory is expected to begin operations in 2025. It will conduct a 10-year survey of the Southern Hemisphere sky to help answer some of astronomers' biggest questions about the universe. The observatory will search for more Kuiper Belt objects. If the orbits of these objects are systematically aligned with each other, it may give more evidence for the existence of Planet X (Planet Nine), or at least help astronomers know where to search for it. Another possibility is that Planet X (Planet Nine) does not exist at all. Some researchers suggest the unusual orbit of those Kuiper Belt objects can be explained by their random distribution. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Asteroids Introduction Asteroids, sometimes called minor planets, are rocky, airless remnants left over from the early formation of our solar system about 4.6 billion years ago. Most asteroids can be found orbiting the Sun between Mars and Jupiter within the main asteroid belt. Asteroids range in size from Vesta – the largest at about 329 miles (530 kilometers) in diameter – to bodies that are less than 33 feet (10 meters) across. The total mass of all the asteroids combined is less than that of Earth's Moon. Latest asteroid count Asteroid News More NASA News Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater Blog 6 Min Read NASA’s Psyche Mission Delivers Mars Flyby Data, Time-lapse Video 5 Min Read NASA Study Finds Near-Earth Asteroid Is Actually Comet Article 6 Min Read NASA Study of Pristine Meteorite Adds to Story of Ancient Asteroids Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Perseverance Rover Reads Record of Ancient Mars Impacts Article Unable to render the provided source Featured Asteroids NASA has sent several robotic spacecraft to study asteroids up close. Many other asteroids have been observed with telescopes here on Earth. 2024 YR4 Read More Apophis Read More Psyche Read More Bennu Read More Dinkinesh and Selam Read More Donaldjohanson Read More Didymos and Dimorphos Read More Vesta Read More Eros Read More Ida and Dactyl Read More Itokawa Read More Resources Planetary Defense Coordination Office (PDCO) The PDCO manages NASA's mission to find, track, and better understand asteroids and comets that could pose an impact hazard to Earth. Center for Near Earth Object Studies (CNEOS) CNEOS computes high-precision orbits for Near-Earth Objects (NEOs) in support of NASA’s Planetary Defense Coordination Office. Minor Planet Center An alphabetical list of asteroid names. National Space Science Data Center: Asteroids Asteroid fact sheets, and more. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Comets Introduction Comets are cosmic snowballs of frozen gases, rock, and dust that orbit the Sun. When frozen, they are the size of a small town. When a comet's orbit brings it close to the Sun, it heats up and spews dust and gases into a giant glowing head larger than most planets. The dust and gases form a tail that stretches away from the Sun for millions of miles. There are likely billions of comets orbiting our Sun in the Kuiper Belt and even more distant Oort Cloud. Get the latest comet count Comet News More NASA News Article 5 Min Read NASA Study Finds Near-Earth Asteroid Is Actually Comet Article 3 Min Read What’s Up: July 2026 Skywatching Tips from NASA 4 Min Read NASA’s Webb Finds Clues to Ancient, Distant Origin of Comet 3I/ATLAS Article 2 Min Read NASA’s Webb Detects Methane on Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS Blog 5 Min Read NASA’s Next-Gen Near-Earth Asteroid Space Telescope Takes Shape Blog Eyes on the Solar System Unable to render the provided source Eyes of the Solar System uses data and images from NASA missions to give you a simulated view of our solar system. Featured Comets 3I/ATLAS Read More Comet 103P/Hartley (Hartley 2) Read More 109P/Swift-Tuttle Read More Comet 19P/Borrelly Read More 1P/Halley Read More 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko Read More Comet 2I/Borisov Read More 2P/Encke Read More 81P/Wild (Wild 2) Read More 9P/Tempel 1 Read More C/1995 O1 (Hale-Bopp) Read More C/2013 A1 Siding Spring Read More C/2012 S1 (ISON) Read More 'Oumuamua Read More Shoemaker-Levy 9 Read More Additional Resources NASA's Planetary Photojournal A catalog of images, videos, and animations of comets and asteroids. National Space Science Data Center: Comets Fact sheets, FAQs, and information about missions to explore comets. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Meteors and Meteorites Meteors and meteorites are often called “shooting stars” — bright lights streaking across the sky. But we call the same objects by different names, depending on where they are located. Get the Facts about Meteors and Meteorites METEORoIDS Still in space MeteoRs In Earth's atmosphere METEorites On the ground METEOR SHOWERS When several meteors per hour are visible Meteoroid, a meteor, or meteorite? Meteoroids These rocks still are in space. Meteoroids range in size from dust grains to small asteroids. Meteors When meteoroids enter Earth’s atmosphere (or that of another planet, like Mars) at high speed and burn up, the fireballs, or “shooting stars,” are called meteors. Meteorites When a meteoroid survives a trip through the atmosphere and hits the ground, it’s called a meteorite. Alex Meshik and Morgan Nunn Martinez collect a meteorite in Antarctica's Miller Range during the 2013-2014 ANSMET field season. ANSMET is the Antarctic Search for Meteorites program. Credit: NASA/JSC/ANSMET What is a Meteor Shower? Scientists estimate that about 48.5 tons (44 tonnes or 44,000 kilograms) of meteoritic material falls on Earth each day. Almost all the material is vaporized in Earth's atmosphere, leaving a bright trail fondly called "shooting stars." Several meteors per hour can usually be seen on any given night. Sometimes the number increases dramatically—these events are called meteor showers. A Perseid meteor over Joshua Tree National Park in 2015. Credit: National Park Service/Brad Sutton. Meteor showers occur annually or at regular intervals as the Earth passes through the trail of dusty debris left by a comet. Meteor showers are usually named after a star or constellation that is close to where the meteors appear in the sky. Perhaps the most famous are the Perseids, which peak in August every year. Every Perseid meteor is a tiny piece of the comet Swift-Tuttle, which swings by the Sun every 135 years. When to watch meteor showers Meteor and Meteorite News Blog 2 Min Read Summer Star Shower: Watch the Perseids with NASA! Article 6 Min Read NASA Study of Pristine Meteorite Adds to Story of Ancient Asteroids 5 Min Read Fireflies and Fireballs: Summer Stargazing with Meteor Watch Day, Asteroid Day Blog 6 Min Read It’s Fireball Season! Answering Your Meteor Questions Blog 4 Min Read NASA Marshall Lunar, Meteor Observatory Marks 20 Years of Discovery Blog Featured Story How to Photograph a Meteor Shower Photographing a meteor shower can be an exercise in patience, but with these tips – and some good fortune –… Read the Story Learn More NASA Skywatching Tips from NASA for watching the night skies. NASA's All Sky Fireball Network A network of cameras set up by NASA to observe meteors brighter than the planet Venus, which are called fireballs. Watch the Skies Blog Current events in the night sky, and more. For Kids: Meteor Showers Information about meteor showers for kids. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

6 min read NASA Study of Pristine Meteorite Adds to Story of Ancient Asteroids Victoria Segovia Jul 15, 2026 Article C1 clasts in Hillsborough: On the left is a back-scattered electron image with two C1 748 clasts circled. On the right, an X-ray map of the same area as (A), indicating Na enrichment in 749 of the C1 clasts relative to the bulk of Hillsborough. Credit: NASA/SETI A meteorite recovered immediately upon its fall to Earth on July 16, 2024, is helping NASA scientists uncover new clues about ancient water, the chemical evolution of primitive asteroids, and the ingredients that may have helped make life possible throughout the early solar system. This rapid recovery began when an amateur astronomer in New Jersey quickly recognized that a newly fallen meteorite had landed on his property. Recognizing its scientific value and wearing protective gloves, he collected the fragments and stored them in aluminum foil and glass containers, which preserved delicate minerals and organic compounds that are often altered by moisture, weather, and contamination. As the meteorite fell to Earth, cameras across New Jersey captured its fiery passage through the atmosphere. Scientists used these observations to reconstruct the fireball's trajectory and, after recovering the meteorite, combined this data with laboratory analyses to determine where in the solar system the rock most likely originated. In a study published Wednesday in the journal Science Advances , researchers found evidence that ancient salty water altered minerals within the meteorite's parent asteroid, preserving unique minerals and a rich inventory of organic compounds. "When we have both a documented fireball and a quick recovery of its meteorite, we can learn not only what the rock is made of, but where it came from in the asteroid belt," said Peter Jenniskens, meteor astronomer at both NASA's Ames Research Center in California's Silicon Valley and the SETI Institute, and lead author of the study. Combined radar detections from the Hillsborough meteorite fall. The green line shows the fireball’s projected path, while colored radar signatures show falling meteorite fragments drifting east-northeast with prevailing winds. Credit: NASA/Marc Fries Named for the township where it was recovered, the Hillsborough meteorite belongs to a class of carbon-rich meteorites known as CM carbonaceous chondrites. These primitive rocks preserve some of the oldest materials in the solar system, recording the chemical processes that shaped asteroids more than 4.5 billion years ago. While examining the unusually pristine meteorite, researchers found a mosaic of tiny broken-up rocks and noticed that some contained unusually high concentrations of sodium — an unexpected finding for this type of meteorite. The surprising signal prompted a closer investigation using powerful electron microscopes that allowed scientists to examine the meteorite from the millimeter scale down to individual atoms. By combining observations across multiple scales, researchers reconstructed the history of the minerals and the fluids that once flowed through them. These analyses revealed microscopic fractures filled with sodium-rich material left behind by ancient brines. Unlike pure water, brines contain dissolved salts that allow them to transport elements and chemically alter the rocks they move through. In the case of the Hillsborough sample, those ancient fluids altered the asteroid's minerals and left behind chemical evidence that remained preserved for billions of years. Scientists were also able to detect fragile sodium-carbonate salts that normally react with moisture in Earth's atmosphere before they can be studied. Jangmi Han, a paper co-author and mineralogist at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston, identified evidence of ancient brines preserved within microscopic fractures. Similar salts were identified in samples returned from the asteroids Bennu and Ryugu by NASA's OSIRIS-REx mission and JAXA's (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency) Hayabusa2 mission. However,Hillsborough marks the first time the salts have been identified in a CM carbonaceous chondrite meteorite, offering a new glimpse into the surfaces of the primitive asteroids that produced these meteorites. Together, these findings suggest that ancient, salt-rich brines were more widespread among primitive asteroids than previously recognized, and provide scientists with new opportunities to compare how water altered different asteroid bodies across the early solar system. "The chips of the most salt-rich bits of this meteorite are quite comparable to the samples returned by the Hayabusa2 and OSIRIS-REx missions," said Mike Zolensky, a meteorite researcher at NASA Johnson and co-author of the study. "They're not identical. They're different in some very interesting ways, but they've seen very similar processes." Following the history of water through the solar system is an essential part of understanding the origin of life. Mike Zolensky Meteorite Researcher Scientists expected Hillsborough to contain a rich suite of organic compounds because it is a CM carbonaceous chondrite. What made the meteorite exceptional was how quickly it was recovered, allowing researchers to study those compounds before prolonged exposure to Earth's environment could contaminate the sample. "One of the big surprises for me when we analyzed a small chip of the Hillsborough meteorite was the complexity of amino acids and other organic compounds," said Danny Glavin, senior scientist in the Astrobiology Analytical Laboratory at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and co-author of the study. Its diversity of amino acids and other organic compounds is, comparable to the Murchison meteorite, a nearly 100-kilogram carbonaceous chondrite that fell in Australia in 1969 and became the benchmark for extraterrestrial organic chemistry. "It's just more proof that the chemical building blocks of life could have been delivered — and are still being delivered — to Earth today by these carbonaceous asteroid fragments,” said Glavin, who was a co-investigator on OSIRIS-REx, leading an international team that studied the organic composition of the samples delivered to Earth from asteroid Bennu in 2023. Understanding the Hillsborough meteorite required expertise from multiple scientific disciplines. Astronomers reconstructed the meteorite's journey through space, finding evidence that it may have originated from the Erigone asteroid family in the inner asteroid belt, home to the asteroid Donaldjohanson , which was visited in 2025 by NASA’s Lucy spacecraft. Mineralogists identified evidence of ancient brines preserved within microscopic fractures, while organic chemists analyzed the meteorite's inventory of amino acids and other organic compounds. “Together, those complementary studies are helping scientists build one of the clearest pictures yet of how primitive asteroids such as the asteroid Erigone evolved chemically over billions of years,” said Jenniskens. Researchers continue to study the Hillsborough meteorite, revealing new details about how water transformed primitive asteroids and shaped the early solar system. By tracing the history of water on primitive asteroids, scientists are learning how water and the chemical ingredients for life were distributed throughout the early solar system. "If you follow the water through the solar system, you're actually following life," Zolensky said. "Following the history of water through the solar system is an essential part of understanding the origin of life." For more information on NASA’s astromaterials research and exploration, visit: https://science.nasa.gov/astromaterials Karen Fox / Molly Wasser Headquarters, Washington 240-285-5155 / 240-419-1732 karen.c.fox@nasa.gov / molly.l.wasser@nasa.gov Victoria Segovia NASA’s Johnson Space Center, Houston 281-483-5111 victoria.segovia@nasa.gov About the Author Victoria Segovia Share Details Last Updated Jul 16, 2026 Related Terms Astromaterials Ames Research Center Asteroids Goddard Space Flight Center Johnson Space Center Meteors & Meteorites Explore More 4 min read NASA Modernizes Commercial Airline Systems NASA’s researchers know that when you settle into your seat on a commercial flight, you… Article 3 days ago 1 min read NASA Aircraft to Make Low-Altitude Research Flights Over Colorado A NASA Dynamic Aviation A200 aircraft will conduct low-flying research flights over farmland near Greeley,… Article 3 days ago 2 min read NASA’s Hubble Seeks Lensed Supernova, Marks 200,000 Orbits Article 4 days ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Missions Humans in Space Climate Change Solar System

Explore This Section Kuiper Belt Facts The Kuiper Belt is a large, doughnut-shaped region of icy bodies extending far beyond the orbit of Neptune. Introduction Namesake Size and Distance Formation and Origins Structure and Characteristics Additional Families Centaurs Pluto's Place in the Kuiper Belt Kuiper Belt Moons and Binaries Relationship to Comets Contents Introduction Namesake Size and Distance Formation and Origins Structure and Characteristics Classical KBOs Resonant KBOs Scattered Disk Additional Families Detached Objects Centaurs Pluto's Place in the Kuiper Belt Kuiper Belt Moons and Binaries Relationship to Comets Introduction The Kuiper Belt is located in the outer reaches of our solar system beyond the orbit of Neptune. It's sometimes called the "third zone" of the solar system. Astronomers think there are millions of small, icy objects in this region – including hundreds of thousands that are larger than 60 miles (100 kilometers) wide. Some of the objects, including Pluto, are over 600 miles (1,000 kilometers) wide. In addition to rock and water ice, objects in the Kuiper Belt also contain a variety of other frozen compounds like ammonia and methane. Similar to the asteroid belt, the Kuiper Belt is a region of leftovers from the solar system's early history. Like the asteroid belt, it has also been shaped by a giant planet, although it's more of a thick disk (like a donut) than a thin belt. The Kuiper Belt shouldn't be confused with the Oort Cloud, which is a much more distant region of icy, comet-like bodies that surrounds the solar system, including the Kuiper Belt. Both the Oort Cloud and the Kuiper Belt are thought to be sources of comets. The Kuiper Belt is truly a frontier in space – it's a place we're still just beginning to explore and our understanding is still evolving. Namesake The region is named for astronomer Gerard Kuiper, who published a scientific paper in 1951 that speculated about objects beyond Pluto. Astronomer Kenneth Edgeworth also mentioned objects beyond Pluto in papers he published in the 1940s, and thus it's sometimes referred to as the Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt. Some researchers prefer to call it the Trans-Neptunian Region, and refer to Kuiper Belt objects (KBOs) as trans-Neptunian objects, or TNOs. Whatever your preferred term is, the belt occupies an enormous volume in our solar system, and the small worlds that inhabit it have a lot to tell us about early history. These two multiple-exposure images from NASA's Hubble Space Telescope show Kuiper Belt objects, or KBOs, against a background of stars in the constellation Sagittarius. The two KBOs are roughly 4 billion miles from Earth. NASA, ESA, SwRI, JHU/APL, New Horizons KBO Search Team Size and Distance The Kuiper Belt is one of the largest structures in our solar system – others being the Oort Cloud, the heliosphere, and the magnetosphere of Jupiter. Its overall shape is like a puffed-up disk or donut. Its inner edge begins at the orbit of Neptune, at about 30 AU from the Sun. (1 AU, or astronomical unit, is the distance from Earth to the Sun.) The inner, main region of the Kuiper Belt ends around 50 AU from the Sun. Overlapping the outer edge of the main part of the Kuiper Belt is a second region called the scattered disk, which continues outward to nearly 1,000 AU, with some bodies on orbits that go even farther beyond. So far, more than 2,000 trans-Neptunian objects have been cataloged by observers, representing only a tiny fraction of the total number of objects scientists think are out there. In fact, astronomers estimate there are hundreds of thousands of objects in the region that are larger than 60 miles (100 kilometers) wide or larger. However, the total mass of all the material in the Kuiper Belt is estimated to be no more than about 10% of the mass of Earth. Formation and Origins Astronomers think the icy objects of the Kuiper Belt are remnants left over from the formation of the solar system. Similar to the relationship between the main asteroid belt and Jupiter, it's a region of objects that might have come together to form a planet had Neptune not been there. Instead, Neptune's gravity stirred up this region of space so much that the small, icy objects there weren't able to coalesce into a large planet. The amount of material in the Kuiper Belt today might be just a small fraction of what was originally there. According to one well-supported theory, the shifting orbits of the four giant planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune) could have caused most of the original material – likely 7 to 10 times the mass of Earth – to be lost. The basic idea is that early in the solar system's history, Uranus and Neptune were forced to orbit farther from the Sun due to shifts in the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn. As Uranus and Neptune drifted farther outward, they passed through the dense disk of small, icy bodies left over after the giant planets formed. Neptune's orbit was the farthest out, and its gravity bent the paths of countless icy bodies inward toward the other giants. Jupiter ultimately slingshotted most of these icy bodies either into extremely distant orbits (to form the Oort Cloud) or out of the solar system entirely. As Neptune tossed icy objects sunward, this caused its own orbit to drift even farther out, and its gravitational influence forced the remaining icy objects into the range of locations where we find them in the Kuiper Belt. Today the Kuiper Belt is slowly eroding away. Objects that remain there occasionally collide, producing smaller objects fragmented by the collision, sometimes comets and also dust that's blown out of the solar system by the solar wind. Structure and Characteristics The Kuiper Belt is an enormous, donut-shaped volume of space in the outer solar system. While there are many icy bodies in this region that we broadly refer to as Kuiper Belt Objects (KBOs) or trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs), they're fairly diverse in size, shape, and color. And importantly, they're not evenly distributed through space – once astronomers started discovering them in the early 1990s, one of the early surprises was that KBOs could be grouped according to the shapes and sizes of their orbits. This led scientists to understand that there are several distinct groupings, or populations, of these objects whose orbits provide clues about their history. Which category an object belongs to has a lot to do with how it has interacted with the gravity of Neptune over time. Most of the objects in the Kuiper Belt are found in the main part of the belt itself or in the scattered disk: Classical KBOs A large fraction of KBOs orbit the Sun in what's called the classical Kuiper Belt. The term "classical" refers to the fact that, among the KBOs, these objects have orbits most similar to the original, or classical, idea of what the Kuiper Belt was expected to be like before astronomers started actually finding objects there. (The expectation was that, if there were objects beyond Neptune, they would be in relatively circular orbits that aren't tilted too much from the plane of the planets. Instead, many KBOs are found to have significantly elliptical and tilted orbits. Thus, to some extent, the classification of KBOs still reflects our evolving understanding of this distant region of the solar system.) There are two main groups of objects in the classical Kuiper Belt, referred to as "cold" and "hot." These terms don't refer to temperature – instead, they describe the orbits of the objects, along with the amount of influence Neptune's gravity has had on them. All classical KBOs have a similar average distance from the Sun between about 40 and 50 AU. Cold classical KBOs have relatively circular orbits that are not tilted much away from the plane of the planets; hot classical KBOs have more elliptical and tilted orbits (which astronomers refer to as eccentric and inclined, respectively). This means the cold variety spend most of their time at about the same distance from the Sun, while the hot ones wander over a larger range of distances from the Sun (meaning, in some parts of their orbits, they are closer to the Sun and sometimes they are farther away). The differences between these two types of bodies in the classical Kuiper Belt have everything to do with Neptune. The cold classical KBOs have orbits that never come very close to Neptune, and thus they remain "cool" and unperturbed by the giant planet's gravity. Their orbits likely haven't moved much for billions of years. In contrast, the hot classical KBOs have had interactions with Neptune in the past (that is, with the giant planet's gravity). These interactions pumped energy into their orbits, which stretched them into an elliptical shape, and tilted them slightly out of the plane of the planets. Resonant KBOs A significant number of KBOs are in orbits that are tightly controlled by Neptune. They orbit in resonance with the giant planet, meaning their orbits are in a stable, repeating pattern with Neptune's. These resonant KBOs complete a specific number of orbits in the same amount of time that Neptune completes a specific number of orbits (in other words, a ratio). There are several of these groupings, or resonances – 1:1 (pronounced "one to one"), 4:3, 3:2, and 2:1. For example, Pluto is in a 3:2 resonance with Neptune, meaning it circles the Sun twice for every three times Neptune goes around. In fact, there are enough objects on orbits with this 3:2 resonance, along with Pluto, that astronomers have given them their own category among the resonant KBOs: the plutinos. Scattered Disk The scattered disk is a region that stretches far beyond the main part of the Kuiper Belt. It is home to objects that have been scattered by Neptune into orbits that are highly elliptical and highly inclined to the plane of the planets. Many scattered disk objects have orbits that are tilted by tens of degrees. Some venture hundreds of AU from the Sun and high above the plane of the planets at the farthest point in their orbits, before falling back to a closest point near the orbit of Neptune. The orbits of many objects in the scattered disk are still slowly evolving, with objects here being lost over time, compared to the classical Kuiper Belt, where orbits are more stable. The scattered disk gives the donut-shaped classical Kuiper Belt a much wider and thicker extent. Some astronomers talk about the two as separate regions, although their boundaries overlap and are linked together in a number of ways. In particular, the objects in both regions are thought to have ended up there as a result of the migration of Neptune from its original, closer orbit to where it is now. Eris is an example of an object in the scattered disk and is the largest known member of this population. Additional Families Most of the objects in the Kuiper Belt are found in the main part of the belt or in the scattered disk, but there are also a couple of additional families of objects that orbit the Sun interior and exterior to the belt. These additional groups of objects probably came from the Kuiper Belt originally, but have been pulled out of the main regions by the gravity of Neptune or perhaps by another massive planet. Detached Objects Detached Kuiper Belt objects have orbits that never come closer to the Sun than about 40 AU. This sets them apart from most other KBOs, which spend at least part of their orbits in the region between 40 and 50 AU from the Sun. Because their orbits don't come close to Neptune's distance from the Sun (~30 AU), detached objects seem unlikely to have been pulled out of the Kuiper Belt by interactions with the giant planet. Scientists think it's likely some other force is responsible, such as an undiscovered giant planet (in a very distant orbit), the gravity of passing stars, or gravitational perturbations as the Kuiper Belt was forming long ago. Sedna is an example of a detached KBO. The closest it comes to the Sun is 76 AU, while at its farthest it travels out to ~1200 AU. Centaurs Centaurs are objects with orbits that travel through the space between the orbits of Jupiter and Neptune. Objects in these orbits interact strongly with the gravity of the giant planets. Because of these powerful gravitational encounters, most are fated to either be ejected from the solar system or pushed into the inner solar system where they become comets or crash into the Sun and planets. This process – the removal of the Centaurs – is ongoing, taking tens of millions of years for the typical Centaur object. Thus, the fact that there are Centaurs around today is evidence that they're being actively supplied from somewhere else. Astronomers think the most likely explanation is that they're relatively recent escapees from the Kuiper Belt. In fact, Centaurs are understood to be scattered objects, like those in the scattered disk – the difference being that the Centaurs have been scattered closer to the Sun by Neptune, rather than farther out. Pluto's Place in the Kuiper Belt In 1930, Pluto became the first Kuiper Belt object to be discovered. It was found at a time before astronomers had reason to expect a large population of icy worlds beyond Neptune. Today it's known as the "King of the Kuiper Belt" – and it's the largest object in the region, even though another object similar in size, called Eris, has a slightly higher mass. Pluto’s orbit is said to be in resonance with the orbit of Neptune, meaning Pluto's orbit is in a stable, repeating pattern with Neptune's. For every three orbits completed by Neptune, Pluto makes two orbits. In this situation, Pluto never comes close enough to Neptune to be affected much by its gravity. In fact, even though its orbit crosses Neptune's orbit, Pluto gets physically closer to Uranus than it ever does to Neptune. Kuiper Belt Moons and Binaries A fairly large number of KBOs either have moons – that is, significantly smaller bodies that orbit them – or are binary objects. Binaries are pairs of objects that are relatively similar in size or mass that orbit around a point – a shared center of mass – that lies between them. Some binaries actually touch, creating a sort of peanut shape, creating what's known as a contact binary. The small Kuiper Belt Object called Arrokoth is a contact binary. It was discovered in 2014 by NASA’s New Horizons science team, using the Hubble Space Telescope. NASA's New Horizons spacecraft flew by Arrokoth on Jan. 1, 2019, snapping images that showed a double-lobed object that looked like a partially flattened red snowman. Arrokoth is the most distant and the most primitive object ever explored by a spacecraft. NASA's New Horizons spacecraft flew past Arrokoth on New Year's 2019, nearly four years after its historic flight through the Pluto system on July 14, 2015. Dwarf planets Pluto, Eris, Haumea, and Makemake are all Kuiper Belt objects that have moons. One thing that makes binary KBOs particularly interesting is that most of them may be extremely ancient, or primordial, objects that have been altered little since their formation. The various ideas for how these pairs form require a lot more objects than the present-day Kuiper Belt appears to contain. One leading idea is that binaries may result from low-speed collisions between KBOs, which would allow them to survive the impact and stick together due to their mutual gravity. Such collisions were likely much more common billions of years ago when most KBOs were on similar orbits that were more circular and close to the plane of the planets (called the ecliptic). Today such collisions are much rarer. They also tend to be destructive, since lots of KBOs are on now orbits that are tilted or elliptical, meaning they crash into each other with greater force and break apart. Relationship to Comets The Kuiper Belt is a source of comets, but not the only source. Today the Kuiper Belt is thought to be very slowly eroding itself away. Objects there occasionally collide, with the collisional fragments producing smaller KBOs (some of which may become comets), as well as dust that's blown out of the solar system by the solar wind. Pieces produced by colliding KBOs can be pushed by Neptune's gravity into orbits that send them sunward, where Jupiter further corrals them into short loops lasting 20 years or less. These are called short-period Jupiter-family comets. Given their frequent trips into the inner solar system, most tend to exhaust their volatile ices fairly quickly and eventually become dormant, or dead, comets with little or no detectable activity. Researchers have found that some near-Earth asteroids are actually burned-out comets, and most of them would have started out in the Kuiper Belt. Many comets crash into the Sun or the planets. Those that have close encounters with Jupiter tend to be ripped apart or tossed out of the solar system entirely. The other source of comets is the Oort Cloud, where most long-period comets on highly tilted orbits come from. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Kuiper Belt: Exploration Introduction Most of what we know about the Kuiper Belt comes from ground-based telescopes and the Hubble Space Telescope . Only one spacecraft has visited the Kuiper Belt. NASA’s New Horizons flew past Pluto in July 2015 – sending back the first clear, close-up images of the tiny world. On Jan. 1, 2019, the spacecraft flew by a Kuiper Belt object later named Arrokoth . In a fitting tribute to the farthest flyby ever conducted by spacecraft, the Kuiper Belt object designated 2014 MU69 was officially named Arrokoth, a Native American term meaning “sky” in the Powhatan/Algonquian language. - More about Arrokoth NASA/Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory/Southwest Research Institute//Roman Tkachenko This flyby was the most distant in the history of space exploration, a billion miles beyond Pluto. The first Kuiper Belt Object –1992 QB1 – was discovered in 1992 by astronomers David Jewitt and Janet Luui. European Southern Observatory History In 1930, Pluto became the first Kuiper Belt object to be discovered. It would be another 62 years until the second one was known. This had a lot to do with the fact that KBOs are quite far away from Earth and generally quite dark. Pluto has a rather bright, reflective surface, compared to many other KBOs, as well as its large size. These qualities made Pluto easier to detect with the telescopes available in the early 20th century. At the time, scientists had not yet developed ideas about the outer solar system that suggested Pluto might have a lot of company. So, despite its oddly elliptical and tilted orbit, it made sense at the time to think of Pluto as a planet. The Kuiper Belt is named for astronomer Gerard Kuiper, who published a scientific paper in 1951 that speculated about objects beyond Pluto. Kuiper's work didn't actually predict the populations of objects we observe in the region named for him, or, crucially, their relationship with Neptune. But he and his ideas were well-known among astronomers such that the general idea of the belt came to be attributed to him. Astronomer Kenneth Edgeworth also briefly mentioned objects beyond Pluto in papers he published in the 1940s, and thus the region is sometimes referred to as the Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt. Other astronomers also speculated that there might be undiscovered icy bodies beyond Neptune, but none were confirmed until 1992. By the early 1990s, scientists had access to new tools that were unavailable to Pluto's discoverer, Clyde Tombaugh, in the 1930s. In 1992, astronomers David Jewitt and Jane Luu attached a CCD camera to a large (2.2-meter) telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii, and they quickly detected an object, which was designated 1992 QB1, and later named Albion. Many more discoveries soon followed, with a couple of thousand KBOs being detected over the next quarter-century. The first spacecraft to enter the Kuiper Belt region was NASA's Pioneer 10 spacecraft when it crossed into the space beyond Neptune's orbit in 1983. But the first spacecraft to visit an object in the Kuiper Belt was New Horizons when it flew by Pluto and its moons. New Horizons then went on to visit Arrokoth. Two moons of the giant planets are thought to potentially be objects originally from the Kuiper Belt that became captured long ago. Neptune's largest moon Triton was visited by NASA's Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989, while Phoebe, a small outer moon of Saturn, was visited by NASA's Cassini spacecraft in 2004. Both of these potential captured Kuiper Belt objects orbit their planets in a direction opposite of the other moons and the planet's rotation, which is a strong indication that they likely were captured objects that strayed too close to the planets. Explore in 3D—Eyes on the Solar System Eyes on the Solar System lets you explore the planets, their moons, asteroids, comets and the spacecraft exploring them from 1950 to 2050. Ride with the Curiosity Rover as it lands on Mars or fly by Pluto with the New Horizons spacecraft all from the comfort of your home computer. Eyes on the Solar System › Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

APOD APOD Astronomy Picture of the Day Discover the cosmos! Each day a different image or photograph of our fascinating universe is featured, along with a brief explanation written by a professional astronomer. Mirrored Meteor and Milky Way Explanation: On August 15, this perseid meteor streaked through night skies over the Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos at La Palma, Canary Islands, Spain. The bright and colorful meteor trail was captured next to the central Milky Way, whose dark interstellar dust clouds and luminous starlight reach above the horizon. In the foreground of this tantalizing celestial scene is the 23 meter diameter mirror of the prototype Large-Sized Telescope ( LST-1 ). LST-1 is the first telescope constructed at the northern hemisphere site of the innovative Cherenkov Telescope Array Observatory . With 198 hexagonal mirror segments and a large, high-efficiency, pixelized camera, LST-1 is designed to detect extremely brief, atmospheric visible light flashes . Lasting about a billionth of a second, the visible light flashes are triggered by energetic gamma-rays from cosmic sources such as distant active galaxies and gamma-ray bursts. Of course, on that night some individual mirror segments of LST-1 also reflected the atmospheric flash of the bright perseid meteor. APOD's email for image submissions has changed. Please see: APOD Submissions . APOD's main NASA site is moving : From apod.nasa.gov to science.nasa.gov/apod Tomorrow's picture: before and after Date September 26, 2026 Credit & Copyright: Jeff Dai ( TWAN ) Authors & editors: Jerry Bonnell, Cecilia Chirenti, Robert Nemiroff, Keighley Rockcliffe A service of: ASD at NASA / GSFC , NASA Science Activation & Michigan Tech. U. Random APOD Generator Yesterday's Image APOD: 2026 September 25 – Globular Star Cluster Omega Centauri Tomorrow's Image APOD: 2026 September 27 – Andromeda Before and After Photoshop

Explore This Section Oort Cloud Facts In 1950, astronomer Jan Oort proposed that some comets come from a vast, extremely distant spherical shell of icy bodies surrounding the solar system. This giant swarm of objects, now named the Oort Cloud, occupies space at a distance between 5,000 and 100,000 astronomical units. Introduction Scale and Distance Formation Orbit and Rotation Home to Comets Contents Introduction Scale and Distance Formation Orbit and Rotation Home to Comets Introduction In the silence and darkness between the stars, where our Sun appears as just a particularly bright star, a theorized group of icy objects collectively called the Oort Cloud coast along their orbits like lazy moths around a porch light. Scale and Distance The Oort Cloud is the most distant region in our solar system, and it's jaw-droppingly far away,extending perhaps one-quarter to halfway from our Sun to the next star. To appreciate the distance to the Oort Cloud, it’s helpful to set aside miles and kilometers and instead use the astronomical unit, or AU — a unit defined as the distance between Earth and the Sun, with 1 AU being roughly 93 million miles or 150 million kilometers. For comparison, Pluto’s more elliptical orbit carries it between about 30 and 50 astronomical units from the Sun. The inner edge of the Oort Cloud, however, is thought to be located between 2,000 and 5,000 AU from the Sun, with the outer edge being located somewhere between 10,000 and 100,000 AU from the Sun. If those distances are difficult to visualize, you can instead use time as your ruler. At its current speed of about a million miles a day, NASA's Voyager 1 spacecraft won't enter the Oort Cloud for about 300 years. And it won’t exit the outer edge for maybe 30,000 years. Even if you could travel at the speed of light (about 671 million miles per hour, or 1 billion kilometers per hour), a trip to the Oort Cloud would require that you pack for a lengthy expedition. A short video guide to distance in the cosmos. NASA/JPL-Caltech When light leaves the Sun, it takes a little over eight minutes to reach Earth, and about 4.5 hours to reach Neptune’s orbit. Just under three hours after passing Neptune’s orbit, the Sun’s light passes beyond the outer edge of the Kuiper Belt. After another 12 hours the sunlight reaches the heliopause, where the solar wind — a torrent of charged particles flowing away from the Sun at about a million miles per hour (400 kilometers per second) — smooshes up against the interstellar medium. Beyond this boundary is interstellar space, where the Sun’s magnetic field holds no sway. The sunlight has now been traveling away from the Sun for about 17 hours. Less than one Earth day after leaving the Sun, the sunlight has already traveled farther from the Sun than any human-made spacecraft. Yet somehow it will be another 10 to 28 days before that same sunlight reaches the inner edge of the Oort Cloud, and perhaps as much as a year and a half before the sunlight passes beyond the Oort Cloud’s outer edge. Formation The leading idea for the formation of the Oort Cloud says that these icy objects were not always so far from the Sun. After the planets formed 4.6 billion years ago, the region in which they formed still contained lots of leftover chunks called planetesimals. Planetesimals formed from the same material as the planets did. The gravity of the planets (primarily Jupiter) then scattered the planetesimals every which way. Some planetesimals were ejected from the solar system entirely, while others were flung into eccentric orbits where they were still held by the Sun’s gravity, but were far enough out that galactic influences also tugged on them. Likely the strongest influence was the tidal force from our galaxy itself. In short, gravity from the planets shoved many icy planetesimals away from the Sun, and gravity from the galaxy likely caused them to settle in the borderlands of the solar system, where the planets couldn’t perturb them anymore. And they became what we now call the Oort Cloud. Again, that’s the leading idea, but the Oort Cloud could also capture objects that didn’t form in the solar system. Comet Siding Spring makes a close pass by Mars in 2014. NASA, ESA, J.-Y. Li (PSI), C.M. Lisse (JHU/APL), and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA) Orbit and Rotation Unlike the planets, the main asteroid belt and many objects in the Kuiper Belt, objects in Oort Cloud do not necessarily travel in the same direction in a shared orbital plane around the Sun. Instead, they can travel under, over and at various inclinations, around the Sun as a thick bubble of distant, icy debris. Hence, they’re called the Oort Cloud rather than the Oort Belt . Dutch astronomer Jan Oort proposed the existence of the cloud to explain (among other things) where long-period comets come from, and why they seem to come from all directions rather than along the orbital plane shared by the planets, asteroids and the Kuiper Belt. Home to Comets There may be hundreds of billions, even trillions, of icy bodies in the Oort Cloud. Now and then, something disturbs the orbit of one of these icy worlds, and it begins a long fall toward our Sun. Two recent examples are comets C/2012 S1 (ISON) and C/2013 A1 Siding Spring. ISON disintegrated when it passed too close to the Sun. Siding Spring, which made a very close pass by Mars, survived its visit to the inner solar system, but will not return for about 740,000 years. Most known long-period comets have been seen only once in recorded history because their orbital periods are so, well, long . (Hence the name.) Countless more unknown long-period comets have never been seen by human eyes. Some have orbits so long that the last time they passed through the inner solar system, our species did not yet exist. Others have never ventured close to the Sun in the billions of years since they formed. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Sun Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Discoveries Dashboard Continually updated from NASA's Exoplanet Archive, get the latest information on the total of confirmed exoplanets, their characteristics, and how they were discovered. Unable to render the provided source Featured Story NASA’s Tally of Planets Outside Our Solar System Reaches 6,000 The milestone highlights the accelerating rate of discoveries, just over three decades since the first exoplanets were found. The official… Read the Story Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore This Section 4 min read Is Earth an Oddball? Pat Brennan Aug 28, 2019 Article How rare in the galaxy are rocky planets like Earth in similar orbits around Sun-like stars? The question turns out to be surprisingly difficult to answer. Apollo 11 Earth image courtesy of NASA Johnson Space Center. NASA Johnson Space Center One of the strangest things in the cosmos might be – us. Among the thousands of planets confirmed to be in orbit around other stars, we’ve found nothing quite like our home planet. Other planets in Earth’s size range? Sure, by the bushel. But also orbiting a star like our Sun, at a comparable distance? So far it’s just one, lonely example. The one beneath our feet. A big part of this is likely to be the technical difficulty of finding a sister planet. Our telescopes, in space and on the ground, find planets around other stars by two main methods: wobbles and shadows. The “wobble” method, or radial velocity, traces the subtle back-and-forth motion as orbiting planets tug their star this way, then that, because of gravity. The larger the tug, the “heavier” the planet — that is, the greater its mass. In the search for shadows, planet-hunting telescopes wait for a tiny dip in starlight as a planet crosses the face of its star — a crossing known as a “ transit .” The bigger the dip, the wider the planet. In both cases, large planets are much easier to detect than small ones. And in the case of transits, small, rocky planets about the size of Earth show up much better against very small stars known as red dwarfs. In a sense, they cast a bigger shadow that blots out proportionally more of a small star’s light, so instruments like NASA’s TESS space telescope can more readily find them. A Sun-sized star won't dim as much when an Earth-size planet passes by, making their transits harder to detect. And there’s another troubling issue: time. A planet orbiting a star at Earth’s distance from the Sun would take about 365 days to make one revolution – just like our planet's "year." But to confirm such an orbit, your telescope would have to stare at that star for, say, 365 days to catch even one transit — and to be sure it's truly a planet, you'll want to see at least two or three of these transit signals. All of these difficulties have placed such planets largely out of reach for today’s instruments. We’ve found plenty of small, rocky planets, but they’re nearly all orbiting red dwarf stars. In our galaxy, red dwarfs are far more common than larger yellow stars like our Sun. That still leaves room for billions of Sun-like stars and, maybe, a significant number of habitable, Earth-sized worlds circling them. Or maybe not. Rare or just difficult? The apparent oddness of our home system doesn’t end with Earth. Our particular arrangement – small, rocky worlds in the nearest orbits, big gas giants farther out – also is something we haven’t yet detected in close parallel anywhere else. Whether this is because they are truly scarce or because they are hard to detect is unclear. Jupiter takes one trip around the Sun every 12 years. But Jupiter-type planets in long orbits are comparatively rare around other stars, and that could be important. Theorists say Jupiter might well have cleared the way for Earth to become a habitable world, quite literally. The giant planet’s intense gravity could have hoovered up small rocky bits that might otherwise have smashed into Earth, sterilizing it just as life was getting its start. “The planetary systems we are finding do not look like our solar system,” said Jessie Christiansen, a research scientist at NASA’s Exoplanet Science Institute. “Is it important that our solar system is different? We don’t know yet.” Christiansen, who studies exoplanet demographics, does not think “Earths” will turn out to be rare, but says scientific literature on the question “is all over the place.” Far more data are needed, scientists tell us, to determine the frequency of planets similar to Earth in both size and circumstance. Future space telescopes could examine the atmospheres of distant, rocky worlds for signs of oxygen, methane or carbon dioxide – in other words, an atmosphere that reminds us of home. For now, we remain in the dark. Earth-like planets around Sun-like stars might be plentiful. Or, they could be the true oddballs of the galaxy. Pat Brennan is a science writer for NASA's Exoplanet Exploration Program. He joined JPL in 2015 after a 30-year career as a newspaper journalist. Share Details Last Updated Apr 22, 2024 Related Terms Exoplanets Earth-like Exoplanets Exoplanet Detection Methods Exoplanet Exploration Program Exoplanet Transits Radial Velocity

5 min read Rocky? Habitable? Sizing up a galaxy of planets NASA Science Editorial Team Oct 25, 2018 Article Artist’s concept of how rocky, potentially habitable worlds elsewhere in our galaxy might appear. Data gathered by telescopes in space and on the ground suggest that small, rocky planets are common. (Placing them so close together in a line is for illustrative purposes only.) NASA/JPL-Caltech/R. Hurt (SSC-Caltech) By Pat Brennan, NASA's Exoplanet Exploration Program The planets so far discovered across the Milky Way are a motley, teeming multitude: hot Jupiters, gas giants, small, rocky worlds and mysterious planets larger than Earth and smaller than Neptune. As we prepare to add many thousands more to the thousands found already, the search goes on for evidence of life – and for a world something like our own. And as our space telescopes and other instruments grow ever more sensitive, we're beginning to zero in. The discoveries so far inspire excitement and curiosity among scientists and the public. We've found rocky planets in Earth's size range, at the right distance from their parent stars to harbor liquid water. While these characteristics don't guarantee a habitable world – we can't quite tell yet if these planets really do possess atmospheres or oceans – they can help point us in the right direction. Future space telescopes will be able to analyze the light from some of these planets, searching for water or a mixture of gases that resembles our own atmosphere. We will gain a better understanding of temperatures on the surface. As we continue checking off items on the habitability list, we'll draw closer and closer to finding a world bearing recognizable signs of life. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Among the most critical factors in the shaping and development of a habitable planet is the nature of its parent star. The star's mass, size and age determine the distance and extent of its "habitable zone" – the region around a star where the temperature potentially allows for liquid water to pool on a planet's surface. Star-mapping the galaxy The European Space Agency's Gaia satellite, launched in 2013, is becoming one of history's greatest star mappers. It relies on a suite of high-precision instruments to measure star brightness, distance and composition. The ambitious goal is to create a three-dimensional map of our Milky Way galaxy. The chart so far includes the positions of about 1.7 billion stars, with distances for about 1.3 billion. That has prompted a reassessment of star sizes to learn whether some might be larger, smaller, dimmer or brighter than scientists had thought. It turns out that many of the stars were found to be brighter – and larger – than previous surveys estimated. For the team managing the explosion of planet finds from NASA's Kepler space telescope, beginning in 2009, that also means a revision of sizes for the planets in orbit around them. If a star is brighter than we thought, it's often larger than we thought as well. The planet in orbit around it, measured proportionally by the transit method, must also be larger. That means some of the planets thought to be of a size and temperature similar to Earth's are really bigger – and usually, hotter. "Gaia has improved distances and has improved assessments of how bright a star is, and how big a planet is," said Eric Mamajek, the deputy program chief scientist for NASA's Exoplanet Exploration Program. "The whole issue has always been, how well do we understand the star? This is just another chapter of that ongoing story." The latest scientific data from the Gaia space probe also is prompting a reassessment of the most promising "habitable zone" planets found by observatories around the world, as well as space-based instruments like NASA's Kepler. As scientists iron out both observations and definitions of what we consider a potentially habitable world, better data is bringing us closer to finding such a planet and – maybe just as important – finding our own planet's place among them. Of the 3,700 exoplanets – planets around other stars – confirmed by scientists so far, about 2,600 were found by the Kepler space telescope. Kepler hunts for the tiny eclipse, or dip in starlight, as a planet crosses the face of its star. The most recent analysis of Kepler's discoveries shows that 20 to 50 percent of the stars in the sky are likely to have small, potentially rocky planets in their habitable zones. Our initial estimate of near Earth-sized, habitable-zone planets from the Kepler spacecraft as of June 19, 2017, was 30. Preliminary analysis of newer data, on both those exoplanets and their host stars, shows that the number is likely smaller – possibly between 2 and 12. Much more data are needed, including a better understanding of how a planet's size relates to its composition. "We're still trying to figure out how big a planet can be and still be rocky," said Jessie Dotson, an astrophysicist at NASA's Ames Research Center in California's Silicon Valley. She is also the project scientist for Kepler's current, extended mission, known as K2. At first glance, the latest analysis might seem disappointing: fewer rocky, potentially habitable worlds among the thousands of exoplanets found so far. But that doesn't change one of the most astonishing conclusions after more than 20 years of observation: Planets in the habitable zone are common. More and better data on these far distant planets means a more accurate demographic portrait of a universe of planets – and a more nuanced understanding of their composition, possible atmospheres and life-bearing potential. That should put us on more solid ground for the coming torrent of exoplanet discoveries from TESS (the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite), and future telescopes as well. It brings us one step closer in our search for a promising planet among a galaxy of stars. "This is the exciting part of science," Dotson said. "So often, we're really portrayed as, 'Now we know this story.' But I have a theory: Scientists love it when we don't know something. It's the hunt that's so exciting." Calla Cofield Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif. 626-808-2469 calla.e.cofield@jpl.nasa.gov Share Details Last Updated Nov 08, 2024 Related Terms Exoplanets Terrestrial Exoplanets Explore More 5 min read Newfound ‘Baby’ Planet Smashes Record for Youngest Known World Article 2 weeks ago 1 min read 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Article 1 month ago 5 min read NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars Article 1 month ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

8 min read Are We Alone in the Universe? Revisiting the Drake Equation NASA Science Editorial Team May 19, 2016 Article Two researchers have revised the Drake equation, a mathematical formula for the probability of finding life or advanced civilizations in the universe. University of Rochester. Are humans unique and alone in the vast universe? This question--summed up in the famous Drake equation--has for a half-century been one of the most intractable and uncertain in science. But a new paper shows that the recent discoveries of exoplanets combined with a broader approach to the question makes it possible to assign a new empirically valid probability to whether any other advanced technological civilizations have ever existed. And it shows that unless the odds of advanced life evolving on a habitable planet are astonishingly low, then human kind is not the universe’s first technological, or advanced, civilization. The paper, published in Astrobiology , also shows for the first time just what “pessimism” or “optimism” mean when it comes to estimating the likelihood of advanced extraterrestrial life. “The question of whether advanced civilizations exist elsewhere in the universe has always been vexed with three large uncertainties in the Drake equation,” said Adam Frank, professor of physics and astronomy at the University of Rochester and co-author of the paper. “We’ve known for a long time approximately how many stars exist. We didn’t know how many of those stars had planets that could potentially harbor life, how often life might evolve and lead to intelligent beings, and how long any civilizations might last before becoming extinct.” “Of course, we have no idea how likely it is that an intelligent technological species will evolve on a given habitable planet,” says Frank. But using our method we can tell exactly how low that probability would have to be for us to be the ONLY civilization the Universe has produced. We call that the pessimism line. If the actual probability is greater than the pessimism line, then a technological species and civilization has likely happened before.” Using this approach, Frank and Sullivan calculate how unlikely advanced life must be if there has never been another example among the universe’s ten billion trillion stars, or even among our own Milky Way galaxy’s hundred billion. Rather than asking how many civilizations may exist now, we ask ‘Are we the only technological species that has ever arisen?'- Woodruff Sullivan, University of Washington The result? By applying the new exoplanet data to the universe’s 2 x 10 to the 22nd power stars, Frank and Sullivan find that human civilization is likely to be unique in the cosmos only if the odds of a civilization developing on a habitable planet are less than about one in 10 billion trillion, or one part in 10 to the 22nd power. “One in 10 billion trillion is incredibly small,” says Frank. “To me, this implies that other intelligent, technology producing species very likely have evolved before us. Think of it this way. Before our result you’d be considered a pessimist if you imagined the probability of evolving a civilization on a habitable planet were, say, one in a trillion. But even that guess, one chance in a trillion, implies that what has happened here on Earth with humanity has in fact happened about a 10 billion other times over cosmic history!” For smaller volumes the numbers are less extreme. For example, another technological species likely has evolved on a habitable planet in our own Milky Way galaxy if the odds against it evolving on any one habitable planet are better than one chance in 60 billion. But if those numbers seem to give ammunition to the “optimists” about the existence of alien civilizations, Sullivan points out that the full Drake equation—which calculates the odds that other civilizations are around today—may give solace to the pessimists. “Thanks to NASA's Kepler satellite and other searches, we now know that roughly one-fifth of stars have planets in “habitable zones,” where temperatures could support life as we know it. So one of the three big uncertainties has now been constrained.” This artist’s conception of a planetary lineup shows habitable zone planets with similarities to Earth: from left, Kepler-22b, Kepler-69c, Kepler-452b, Kepler-62f and Kepler-186f. Last in line is Earth itself. NASA/JPL-Caltech Frank said that the third big question--how long civilizations might survive--is still completely unknown. “The fact that humans have had rudimentary technology for roughly ten thousand years doesn’t really tell us if other societies would last that long or perhaps much longer,” he explained. But Frank and his coauthor, Woodruff Sullivan of the astronomy department and astrobiology program at the University of Washington, found they could eliminate that term altogether by simply expanding the question. “Rather than asking how many civilizations may exist now, we ask ‘Are we the only technological species that has ever arisen?" said Sullivan. “This shifted focus eliminates the uncertainty of the civilization lifetime question and allows us to address what we call the ‘cosmic archaeological question’—how often in the history of the universe has life evolved to an advanced state?” That still leaves huge uncertainties in calculating the probability for advanced life to evolve on habitable planets. It's here that Frank and Sullivan flip the question around. Rather than guessing at the odds of advanced life developing, they calculate the odds against it occurring in order for humanity to be the only advanced civilization in the entire history of the observable universe. With that, Frank and Sullivan then calculated the line between a Universe where humanity has been the sole experiment in civilization and one where others have come before us. The Drake equation, a mathematical formula for the probability of finding life or advanced civilizations in the universe. University of Rochester. In 1961, astrophysicist Frank Drake developed an equation to estimate the number of advanced civilizations likely to exist in the Milky Way galaxy. The Drake equation (top row) has proven to be a durable framework for research, and space technology has advanced scientists' knowledge of several variables. But it is impossible to do anything more than guess at variables such as L , the probably longevity of other advanced civilizations. In new research, Adam Frank and Woodruff Sullivan offer a new equation (bottom row) to address a slightly different question: What is the number of advanced civilizations likely to have developed over the history of the observable universe? Frank and Sullivan's equation draws on Drake's, but eliminates the need for L. Their argument hinges upon the recent discovery of how many planets exist and how many of those lie in what scientists call the “habitable zone” – planets in which liquid water, and therefore life, could exist. This allows Frank and Sullivan to define a number they call N ast . N ast is the product of N*, the total number of stars; f p , the fraction of those stars that form planets; and n p , the average number of those planets in the habitable zones of their stars. They then set out what they call the “Archaelogical-form” of the Drake equation, which defines A as the “number of technological species that have ever formed over the history of the observable Universe.” Their equation, A=N ast *f bt , describes A as the product of Nast – the number of habitable planets in a given volume of the Universe – multiplied by f bt – the likelihood of a technological species arising on one of these planets. The volume considered could be, for example, the entire Universe, or just our Galaxy. “The universe is more than 13 billion years old,” said Sullivan. “That means that even if there have been a thousand civilizations in our own galaxy, if they live only as long as we have been around—roughly ten thousand years—then all of them are likely already extinct. And others won’t evolve until we are long gone. For us to have much chance of success in finding another "contemporary" active technological civilization, on average they must last much longer than our present lifetime.” “Given the vast distances between stars and the fixed speed of light we might never really be able to have a conversation with another civilization anyway,” said Frank. “If they were 20,000 light years away then every exchange would take 40,000 years to go back and forth.” But, as Frank and Sullivan point out, even if there aren’t other civilizations in our galaxy to communicate with now, the new result still has a profound scientific and philosophical importance. “From a fundamental perspective the question is ‘has it ever happened anywhere before?’” said Frank. Our result is the first time anyone has been able to set any empirical answer for that question and it is astonishingly likely that we are not the only time and place that an advance civilization has evolved.” According to Frank and Sullivan their result has a practical application as well. As humanity faces its crisis in sustainability and climate change we can wonder if other civilization-building species on other planets have gone through a similar bottleneck and made it to the other side. As Frank puts it “We don’t even know if it’s possible to have a high-tech civilization that lasts more than a few centuries.” With Frank and Sullivan’s new result, scientists can begin using everything they know about planets and climate to begin modeling the interactions of an energy-intensive species with their home world knowing that a large sample of such cases has already existed in the cosmos. “Our results imply that our evolution has not been unique and has probably happened many times before. The other cases are likely to include many energy intensive civilizations dealing with their feedbacks onto their planets as their civilizations grow. That means we can begin exploring the problem using simulations to get a sense of what leads to long lived civilizations and what doesn’t.” Do NASA Science with the Are We Alone in the Universe Project! Join the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. NASA invites people of all ages and backgrounds to participate in authentic NASA research via "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, where volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of important scientific discoveries. As a part of the Are We Alone in the Universe project, you'll help scientists use the largest fully steerable radio telescope on Earth to search for evidence of civilizations in the galaxy. Get Involved Share Details Last Updated Feb 06, 2026 Related Terms Exoplanets Explore More 5 min read Newfound ‘Baby’ Planet Smashes Record for Youngest Known World Article 2 weeks ago 1 min read 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Article 1 month ago 5 min read NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars Article 1 month ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore This Section Can We Find Life? Fast facts: Are we alone in the universe? So far, the only life we know of is right here on our planet Earth. But we’re looking. The big question – Is there life beyond Earth? – comes with an ironic asterisk: we don't really have a universally accepted definition of life itself. That said, we might not need one. We need only detect the telltale signs of life in an exoplanet atmosphere , and we have a better understanding of what those look like here on Earth. An artist's concept of what Kepler-1649c could look like from its surface. NASA/Ames Research Center/Daniel Rutter Will we know life when we see it? The James Webb Space Telescope , launched in 2021, could get the first glimpses: the mix of gases in the atmospheres of Earth-sized exoplanets. Webb, or a similar spacecraft in the future, could pick up signs of an atmosphere like our own – oxygen, carbon dioxide, methane. A strong indication of possible life. Future telescopes might even pick up signs of photosynthesis – the transformation of light into chemical energy by plants – or even gases or molecules suggesting the presence of animal life. Intelligent, technological life might create atmospheric pollution, as it does on our planet, also detectable from afar. Of course, the best we might be able to manage is an estimate of probability. Still, an exoplanet with, say, a 95 percent probability of life would be a game changer of historic proportions. Artist's rendering of the James Webb Space Telescope. NASA How will we find life? Life might turn up in our own neighborhood: beneath the Martian surface , perhaps, or in the dark, subsurface oceans of Jupiter's moon, Europa . Or maybe the dream of the ages will come true, and we'll eavesdrop on the communications of extraterrestrial civilizations . We might even capture evidence of "technosignatures," or traces of technology (think smog). Barring these strokes of luck, however, the job will be much harder. Light will be the key – light from the atmospheres of exoplanets, split up into a rainbow spectrum that we can read like a bar code . This method, called transit spectroscopy, would provide a menu of gases and chemicals in the skies of these worlds, including those linked to life. the search for life New Report: Perseverance Rock Sample Contains 'Potential Biosignatures' A sample collected by NASA’s Perseverance Mars rover from an ancient dry riverbed in Jezero Crater could preserve evidence of ancient microbial life. Taken from a rock named “Cheyava Falls” last year, the sample, called “Sapphire Canyon,” contains potential biosignatures, according to a paper published Wednesday in the journal Nature. Read 'NASA Says Mars Rover Discovered Potential Biosignature Last Year' NASA's Perseverance Mars rover alongside the rock nicknamed "Cheyava Falls," in this July 23, 2024, selfie made up of 62 individual images. "Cheyava Falls," which has features that may bear on the question of whether the Red Planet was long ago home to microscopic life, is to the left of the rover near the center of the image. The small hole visible in the rock is where Perseverance collected the "Sapphire Canyon" core sample. NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS Curiosity rover discovery ‘Non-Biologic Processes Don’t Fully Explain Mars Organics’ In a new study, researchers say that non-biological sources they considered could not fully account for the abundance of organic compounds in a sample collected on Mars by NASA’s Curiosity rover. A Feb. 4 report in the journal Astrobiology analyzed the discovery — the largest organic compounds found on Mars, hypothesized to possibly be fragments of fatty acids preserved in the ancient mudstone in Gale Crater. Learn More This graphic shows the long-chain organic molecules decane, undecane, and dodecane. These are the largest organic molecules discovered on Mars to date. They were detected in a drilled rock sample called “Cumberland” that was analyzed by the Sample Analysis at Mars lab inside the belly of NASA’s Curiosity rover. The rover, whose selfie is on the right side of the image, has been exploring Gale Crater since 2012. An image of the Cumberland drill hole is faintly visible in the background of the molecule chains. NASA/Dan Gallagher Artist's rendering of NASA's Europa Clipper spacecraft, heading to Jupiter (rear) and its icy moon Europa (foreground) to begin exploring in 2030. NASA/JPL-Caltech Life as we don't know it They dwell in the caustic chemical pools of Yellowstone National Park , in the dry valleys of Antarctica , in superheated vents on the ocean floor , and they belong to branches of life that split from our own billions of years ago. "Extremophiles" are life forms that love extreme environments, thriving in conditions that would kill anything else. They might also be analogs for strange life on distant worlds. Grand Prismatic Spring in Yellowstone National Park. NPS/Jim Peaco Where should we look? More than 5,800 exoplanets – planets around other stars – have been confirmed to exist in our galaxy, but likely number in the trillions. One of the best tools scientists have to begin narrowing the search for habitable worlds is a concept known as the “habitable zone.” It’s the orbital distance from a star where temperatures would potentially allow liquid water to form on a planet’s surface. Many other conditions also would be required: a planet of suitable size with a suitable atmosphere, and a stable star not prone to erupting in sterilizing flares. The habitable zone is really just a way to make the first cut, and zero in on the planets with the best chance of possessing habitable conditions. Next: All about the habitable zone More: How NASA's Astrobiology Program is looking for life in our solar system and beyond. Featured Exoplanet K2-18 b Researchers studying this potential ocean world have found water vapor, carbon-bearing molecules, and — more recently — possible dimethyl sulfide, a molecule that on Earth is produced by marine life. K2-18 b is a super-Earth exoplanet, nearly nine times the mass of Earth, and is about 124 light-years away. It only takes about 33 days to orbit its star, a red dwarf that’s smaller and cooler than our Sun, but it resides in the “Habitable Zone” — the region around a star neither too hot not too cold, where liquid water could exist on a planet’s surface. The Hubble Space Telescope detected water vapor in K2-18 b’s atmosphere in 2019 — the first time for a habitable-zone exoplanet. And the James Webb Space Telescope has since found carbon-bearing molecules including methane and carbon dioxide in K2-18 b’s atmosphere. Webb telescope observations also revealed the possible detection of a molecule called dimethyl sulfide. On Earth, most dimethyl sulfide in the atmosphere is emitted by marine phytoplankton. Read ‘Webb Discovers Methane, Carbon Dioxide in Atmosphere of K2-18 b’ about K2-18 b This artist's concept shows the planet K2-18 b, its host star, and an accompanying planet in this system. K2-18 b is the first super-Earth exoplanet known to host both water and temperatures that could support life. Researchers used archive data from 2016 and 2017 captured by the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope and found the molecular signature of water vapor, as well as the presence of hydrogen and helium in the planet's atmosphere. Illustration: NASA, CSA, ESA, J. Olmsted (STScI), Science: N. Madhusudhan (Cambridge University) More About K2-18 b How NASA’s Webb Telescope Supports Our Search for Life Beyond Earth With its unprecedented sensitivity and resolution, Webb can study the chemical composition of exoplanet atmospheres, offering clues about habitability and potential biosignatures. But this requires hundreds of hours of observing time for a single planet, follow-up studies, and multiple converging lines of evidence to confirm true biosignatures and rule out false positives. Read More 3 min read Hubble Finds Water Vapor on Habitable-Zone Exoplanet for First Time Article 7 years ago K2-18 b, In Depth Find more details about K2-18 b, see an artist's concept of the planet, and explore a 3D interactive view, in its Exoplanet Catalog entry. Explore K2-18 b in the Exoplanet Catalog Kepler/K2 NASA's planet-hunting space telescope that discovered K2-18 b, and most of the other exoplanets we know about — 3,327 confirmed, so far. Read More About Kepler/K2 James Webb Space Telescope One of the main uses of the Webb telescope is to study the atmospheres of exoplanets, to search for the building blocks of life elsewhere in the universe. Read More About Webb Exoplanet Research Hubble Space Telescope Learn about Hubble's exoplanet observations Read More About Hubble Exoplanet Research Do NASA Science With the Are We Alone in the Universe Project Join the search for extraterrestrial intelligence NASA invites people of all ages and backgrounds to participate in authentic NASA research via "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, where volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of important scientific discoveries. As a part of the Are We Alone in the Universe project, you'll help scientists use the largest fully steerable radio telescope on Earth to search for evidence of civilizations in the galaxy. Get Involved Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Universe Black Holes

Explore Hubble Science Hubble's Star Clusters These jewels of the night sky offer us a glimpse at the lifecycle of stars. Overview Open Clusters Globular Clusters Embedded Clusters Hubble's Impact Thousands upon thousands of stars illuminate this breathtaking image of star cluster Liller 1, imaged with Hubble’s Wide Field Camera 3. This stellar system, located 30,000 light-years from Earth, formed stars over 11 billion years. ESA/Hubble & NASA, F. Ferraro Overview Billions of trillions of stars illuminate the galaxies of our universe. Each brilliant ball of hydrogen and helium is born within a cloud of gas and dust called a nebula. Deep within these clouds, knots can form, pulling in gas and dust until they become massive enough to collapse under their own gravitational attraction. During the collapse, the center of the knot heats up to form a hot core called a protostar. The protostar continues to gather dust and gas, taking millions of years to mature into an adult star like our Sun. All the while, heat energy from the core provides enough outward pressure to keep the star from collapsing under the inward gravitational pressure of its own mass. In the hot core, thousands of quintillions of nuclear fusion reactions convert hydrogen atoms to helium atoms each second, giving off massive quantities of energy that make the star shine brightly. Stars often form in groups or clusters from the same nebulae. Over time, the leftover dust and gas around a star blow away or form into other cosmic bodies like planets, asteroids, and comets. Gravity then pulls the young stars together, and they begin to orbit each other. Star clusters can contain as few as ten stars or as many as millions of stars. There are three main types of star clusters, and Hubble has imaged each of them over its three decades of operation. Some of our galaxy’s most massive, luminous stars burn 8,000 light-years away in the open cluster Trumpler 14. NASA, ESA, and J. Maíz Apellániz (Institute of Astrophysics of Andalusia, Spain); Acknowledgment: N. Smith (University of Arizona) Open Clusters Open clusters contain between a few dozen and a few thousand stars, all formed from the same initial cloud of gas and dust. The density of stars is low enough in these clusters that individual stars are visible with a telescope, or sometimes the unaided eye, giving them an “open” appearance. Most open clusters reside in the arms of spiral galaxies, and their stars are usually relatively young. Their shape is more irregular than spherical, with large amounts of gas between the stars. Over time, as these clusters rotate around a galaxy, gravitational disruptions from passing cosmic objects can cause the stars to disperse. The Milky Way is home to more than a thousand of these clusters, and even our Sun may have formed in an open cluster. This Hubble image of a loosely bound collections of stars reveals a portion of the open cluster Caldwell 71. NASA, ESA, and T. von Hippel (Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University); Processing: Gladys Kober (NASA/Catholic University of America) Globular Clusters Globular clusters are much larger and denser than open clusters, containing several thousand to millions of stars all formed from a shared nebula. Unlike open clusters, the density of stars at their centers is so high that individual stars are hard to discern, even with powerful telescopes. Globular clusters lie on the dusty outskirts of galaxies and their stars are older than those in open clusters. In fact, globular clusters contain some of the oldest known stars in a galaxy. Because old stars tend to have a reddish glow, globular clusters generally appear redder than open clusters. Many thousands of stars burn brightly in the globular cluster Terzan 4, part of the constellation Scorpius. The brighter blue stars in the cluster center burn hotter and die more quickly; the red stars on the outskirts are older stars that burn less hot. ESA/Hubble & NASA, R. Cohen The large number of stars in a relatively small area causes the shape of a globular cluster to appear spherical, as stars’ intense gravitational attraction pulls them together. These gravitational ties grant globular clusters more stability than open clusters, helping them keep their structure instead of breaking up over time. The Milky Way alone has over 150 globular clusters, and our nearest neighboring galaxy Andromeda has over 400. Embedded Clusters Embedded clusters are a precursor to open and globular clusters. As the youngest type of star cluster, they contain newly born and forming stars surrounded by cosmic gas and dust. As with open and globular clusters, all of the stars formed from the same initial nebula. Embedded clusters are likely the basic unit of star formation since a significant fraction of all stars form within them. Once star formation ends, embedded clusters resemble open clusters, but are often disrupted by passing objects due to their weaker gravitational bonds. The embedded phase typically lasts between 2-7 million years. Since embedded clusters are heavily obscured by dust, they are rarely observed in visible wavelengths of light. However, Hubble’s infrared instruments can detect the longer wavelengths of infrared light that aren’t as easily scattered by clouds of gas and dust. Hubble’s unique capabilities are essential for learning more about these young clusters. A few young stars shine through dense clouds of gas and dust in the Orion Nebula’s Trapezium embedded cluster, 1,500 light-years from Earth. The left image is taken in visible light; the right image is taken in infrared light. NASA, C.R. O'Dell and S.K. Wong (Rice University) Hubble’s Impact Much of what scientists know today about stellar science has roots in Hubble’s three decades of observations. Astronomers use the telescope to study the composition of star clusters, how they evolve, and how gravity influences them. Hubble is also instrumental in distinguishing individual stars within a cluster and helped astronomers make early observations of white dwarfs – the dense, hot cores of stars that have exhausted their nuclear fuel – in a globular cluster. The telescope also expanded our understanding of stars known as blue stragglers, a type of star that can pull matter off of its neighbor, gaining extra fuel and burning brighter as a result. In 2021, Hubble data provided evidence supporting the existence of a collection of small black holes in the center of the globular cluster NGC 6397. Though contested, this evidence may provide support for the theory that the merger of small black holes is an important source of gravitational waves, which are only detected on Earth as a result of dramatic collision events like the ones occurring in NGC 6397. Perhaps the most important piece of star cluster knowledge revealed by Hubble is that clusters can contain several generations of stars, making them far more complex than previously thought. Since the stars within a cluster likely form from the same cloud of gas and dust, discovering varying stellar ages within the same cluster has the potential to fundamentally alter our understanding of star formation. Future observations by Hubble will further the depths of our knowledge about star clusters, helping us to grasp the complexity, beauty, and remaining mystery of the stars illuminating our universe. Hubble’s Star Clusters 98 Images Go To Gallery Go To Gallery Explore More Read about Hubble's latest discoveries. NASA’s Hubble Seeks Lensed Supernova, Marks 200,000 Orbits 2 min read NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope completed its 200,000th orbit around Earth on Sept. 19, marking another new milestone for an observatory… Article NASA’s Hubble Spots an Out-of-Sync Galaxy 3 min read Though the spiral galaxy in this new image from the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope seems serene, it hides a chaotic secret. This… Article NASA’s Hubble, Webb Find Far-out Solar System Objects ‘Remember’ Past 5 min read For the first time, scientists used the joint power of NASA’s Hubble and James Webb Space Telescopes to study some… Article Explore More Hubble Impact & Benefits Hubble's mission is to capture observations of the universe, but its technology would alter life on the ground in unique and unexpected ways. Hubble Servicing Missions Hubble’s serviceable design and modular components enabled upgrades that took advantage of advancements in technology. Hubble Online Activities Find your Hubble birthday image, take interactive tours, play games, and discover the universe with Hubble. Hubble E-books Investigate the mysteries of the universe, or dive into Hubble's history with our free, downloadable e-books.

Explore the Universe Star Types Contents Types of Stars Main Sequence Stars Red Giants White Dwarfs Neutron Stars Red Dwarfs Brown Dwarfs Types of Stars The universe’s stars range in brightness, size, color, and behavior. Some types change into others very quickly, while others stay relatively unchanged over trillions of years. Main Sequence Stars NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory captured this image of our 4.6-billion-year-old Sun, a main sequence star. Scientists expect it will remain one for another 5 billion years before becoming a red giant. NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio/SDO A normal star forms from a clump of dust and gas in a stellar nursery. Over hundreds of thousands of years, the clump gains mass, starts to spin, and heats up. When the clump's core heats up to millions of degrees, nuclear fusion starts. This process occurs when two protons, the nuclei of hydrogen atoms, merge to form one helium nucleus. Fusion releases energy that heats the star, creating pressure that pushes against the force of its gravity. A star is born. Scientists call a star that is fusing hydrogen to helium in its core a main sequence star. Main sequence stars make up around 90% of the universe’s stellar population. They range in luminosity, color, and size – from a tenth to 200 times the Sun’s mass – and live for millions to billions of years. For Stargazers: Many main sequence stars can be seen with the unaided eye, such as Sirius – the brightest star in the night sky – in the northern constellation Canis Major. Rigil Kentaurus (better known as Alpha Centauri) in the southern constellation Centaurus is the closest main sequence star that can be seen with the unaided eye. Red Giants This illustration depicts a red giant star, like Betelgeuse or Antares. NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center/Chris Smith (KBRwyle) When a main sequence star less than eight times the Sun’s mass runs out of hydrogen in its core, it starts to collapse because the energy produced by fusion is the only force fighting gravity’s tendency to pull matter together. But squeezing the core also increases its temperature and pressure, so much so that its helium starts to fuse into carbon, which also releases energy. Hydrogen fusion begins moving into the star’s outer layers, causing them to expand. The result is a red giant, which would appear more orange than red. Eventually, the red giant becomes unstable and begins pulsating, periodically expanding and ejecting some of its atmosphere. Eventually, all of its outer layers blow away, creating an expanding cloud of dust and gas called a planetary nebula. The Sun will become a red giant in about 5 billion years. For Stargazers: Arcturus in the northern constellation Boötes and Gamma Crucis in the southern constellation Crux (the Southern Cross) are red giants visible to the unaided eye. White Dwarfs In this illustration, an asteroid (bottom left) breaks apart under the powerful gravity of LSPM J0207+3331, the oldest, coldest white dwarf known to be surrounded by a ring of dusty debris. NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center/Scott Wiessinger After a red giant has shed all its atmosphere, only the core remains. Scientists call this kind of stellar remnant a white dwarf. A white dwarf is usually Earth-size but hundreds of thousands of times more massive. A teaspoon of its material would weigh more than a pickup truck. A white dwarf produces no new heat of its own, so it gradually cools over billions of years. Despite the name, white dwarfs can emit visible light that ranges from blue white to red. Scientists sometimes find that white dwarfs are surrounded by dusty disks of material, debris, and even planets – leftovers from the original star’s red giant phase. In about 10 billion years, after its time as a red giant, the Sun will become a white dwarf. For Stargazers: White dwarfs are too dim to see with the unaided eye, although some can be found in binary systems with an easily seen main sequence star. Procyon B is an example in the northern constellation Canis Minor. If you have a telescope at home, though, you can see solitary white dwarfs LP 145-141 in the southern constellation Musca and Van Maanen’s star in the northern constellation Pisces. Neutron Stars The Vela pulsar is located in the circular white dot in the center of this image captured by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory. The pulsar resides over 1,000 light-years away in the southern constellation Vela. NASA/CXC/Univ of Toronto/M. Durant et al. Neutron stars are stellar remnants that pack more mass than the Sun into a sphere about as wide as New York City’s Manhattan Island is long. A neutron star forms when a main sequence star with between about eight and 20 times the Sun’s mass runs out of hydrogen in its core. (Heavier stars produce stellar-mass black holes.) The star starts fusing helium to carbon, like lower-mass stars. But then, when the core runs out of helium, it shrinks, heats up, and starts converting its carbon into neon, which releases energy. This process continues as the star converts neon into oxygen, oxygen into silicon, and finally silicon into iron. These processes produce energy that keep the core from collapsing, but each new fuel buys it less and less time. By the time silicon fuses into iron, the star runs out of fuel in a matter of days. The next step would be fusing iron into some heavier element, but doing so requires energy instead of releasing it. The core collapses and then rebounds back to its original size, creating a shock wave that travels through the star’s outer layers. The result is a huge explosion called a supernova. The remnant core is a superdense neutron star. Pulsars: These are a type of rapidly rotating neutron star. Bright X-ray hot spots form on the surfaces of these objects. As they rotate, the spots spin in and out of view like the beams of a lighthouse. Some pulsars spin faster than blender blades. Magnetars: All neutron stars have strong magnetic fields. But a magnetar’s can be 10 trillion times stronger than a refrigerator magnet’s and up to a thousand times stronger than a typical neutron star’s. For Stargazers: Neutron stars are too faint to see with the unaided eye or backyard telescopes, although the Hubble Space Telescope has been able to capture a few in visible light. Astronomers usually observe them via X-rays and radio emission. Red Dwarfs Our closest stellar neighbor, shown here in this Hubble image, is the red dwarf Proxima Centauri. It’s just over 4 light-years away in the southern constellation Centaurus. ESA/Hubble & NASA Red dwarfs are the smallest main sequence stars – just a fraction of the Sun’s size and mass. They’re also the coolest, and appear more orange in color than red. When a red dwarf produces helium via fusion in its core, the released energy brings material to the star’s surface, where it cools and sinks back down, taking along a fresh supply of hydrogen to the core. Because of this constant churning, red dwarfs can steadily burn through their entire supply of hydrogen over trillions of years without changing their internal structures, unlike other stars. Scientists think some low-mass red dwarfs, those with just a third of the Sun’s mass, have life spans longer than the current age of the universe, up to about 14 trillion years. Red dwarfs are also born in much greater numbers than more massive stars. Because of that, and because they live so long, red dwarfs make up around 75% of the Milky Way galaxy’s stellar population. For Stargazers: Red dwarfs are too faint to see with the unaided eye. But with a backyard telescope, you may be able to see Lacaille 8760 in the southern constellation Microscopium or Lalande 21185 in the northern constellation Ursa Major. Brown Dwarfs Brown dwarf LSRJ1835+3259, illustrated here, resides 20 light-years away in the northern constellation Lyra. Chuck Carter and Gregg Hallinan/Caltech Brown dwarfs aren’t technically stars. They’re more massive than planets but not quite as massive as stars. Generally, they have between 13 and 80 times the mass of Jupiter. They emit almost no visible light, but scientists have seen a few in infrared light. Some brown dwarfs form the same way as main sequence stars, from gas and dust clumps in nebulae, but they never gain enough mass to do fusion on the scale of a main sequence star. Others may form like planets, from disks of gas and dust around stars. For Stargazers: Brown dwarfs are invisible to both the unaided eye and backyard telescopes. This artist’s concept compares star sizes to common objects. Start by imagining the Sun is the size of a beach ball … NASA Do NASA Science with Backyard Worlds: Planet 9! Want to help discover a new world? The Backyard Worlds: Planet 9 citizen science project invites volunteers to help scientists search the realm beyond Neptune for new brown dwarfs and planets. Join the search today Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Universe Galaxies Black Holes Exoplanets

Stars Stories Filters NASA-JAXA XRISM Mission Sees Pulsar Gathering Companion’s ‘Wind’ 5 min read Using data from the Japan-led XRISM (X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission) observatory, astronomers have directly observed a giant star’s outflow, called a stellar wind, being captured by its compact companion and providing the power source for strong X-ray flares. The… Article Newfound ‘Baby’ Planet Smashes Record for Youngest Known World 5 min read Astronomers have confirmed a world that’s less than a million years old as the youngest known planet, using data from NASA-funded archives. Called Elias 2-24 b, the baby planet is still whirling in its natal disk of dust and gas.… Article NASA’s Webb Reveals Dynamic Panorama of Star Formation 5 min read This starry view of the nearby star-forming region IC 348 is one of the largest images released to date from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope. Using Webb, astronomers searched IC 348 for brown dwarfs, which are less massive than the… Article

Explore Webb 5 Min Read NASA’s Webb Reveals Dynamic Panorama of Star Formation NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope recently observed IC 348, a star-forming region just 1,000 light-years away from Earth. Webb’s sharp vision revealed tiny brown dwarfs, some just twice Jupiter’s mass, and young stars ejecting powerful jets crashing into surrounding gas and dust. Credits: Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, Kevin Luhman (PSU), Catarina Alves de Oliveira (ESA), Mahdi Zamani (ESA/Webb) NASA Webb Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center Sep 15, 2026 Article Contents IC 348 (NIRCam Image) IC 348 Collage Downloads & Related Information Related Links This starry view of the nearby star-forming region IC 348 is one of the largest images released to date from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope. Using Webb, astronomers searched IC 348 for brown dwarfs, which are less massive than the smallest stars. The researchers discovered brown dwarfs just twice the mass of Jupiter, bringing the study of these curious objects into a new mass range and revealing new insights about the star formation process. The star-forming region IC 348 is located just 1,000 light-years away in the constellation Perseus. In regions like IC 348, cold clouds of molecular hydrogen gas collapse to form new stars, creating glowing, sculpted scenes like this one. The star-formation process can create widely varied objects, from massive stars that expire after only a few million years in core-collapse supernova explosions to the smallest and most common stars, which are long lived and produce powerful stellar storms. IC 348 (NIRCam Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope recently observed IC 348, a star-forming region just 1,000 light-years away from Earth. Webb’s sharp vision revealed tiny brown dwarfs, some just twice Jupiter’s mass, and young stars ejecting powerful jets crashing into surrounding gas and dust. Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, Kevin Luhman (PSU), Catarina Alves de Oliveira (ESA), Mahdi Zamani (ESA/Webb) The smallest stars weigh in at around 8 percent of the Sun’s mass. Below this mass lies a strange class of objects called brown dwarfs. Brown dwarfs form in the same way stars do, through the collapse of molecular clouds. However, unlike stars, the cores of brown dwarfs never become hot enough to fuse ordinary hydrogen into helium (though many briefly fuse deuterium, or heavy hydrogen, early in their lives). What’s still not clear, and what researchers hoped to learn by using Webb’s sensitive instruments to study IC 348, is how small the smallest objects created by the star-formation process are. In other words, how small is the smallest brown dwarf? Researchers seeking to answer this question first used Webb to study IC 348 in 2022, when they discovered brown dwarfs with masses as low as three to four times the mass of Jupiter . Now, the same research team has used Webb to probe even deeper into this region in search of even smaller brown dwarfs. The team used Webb’s NIRCam (Near-Infrared Camera) in 2024 to capture the warm glow of young brown dwarfs and newborn stars seen in this new image of IC 348. After selecting candidate brown dwarfs based on their colors and brightness, they followed up with Webb’s NIRSpec (Near-Infrared Spectrograph) in 2025 to conduct spectroscopic observations to study the masses of the brown dwarfs. These deep Webb observations revealed something remarkable to the researchers: brown dwarfs with masses as low as just twice the mass of Jupiter or only 0.19 percent of the Sun’s mass — far smaller than theory predicts brown dwarfs should be. These are the least massive brown dwarfs known and their existence poses a challenge to models of how stars form. In addition to the discovery of these unexpectedly lightweight brown dwarfs, the Webb observations contained even more surprises. One of the lightest newfound brown dwarfs showed signs of a disk, suggesting that small planets could be forming around an object that is itself only the mass of a planet. While inspecting the spectra of IC 348’s brown dwarfs, the research team also found a feature they attributed to an unidentified hydrocarbon — molecules made only of hydrogen and carbon atoms. This specific feature has only been seen in the atmospheres of the lowest-mass brown dwarfs, suggesting that these extreme objects might exist in a spectral class of their own. The stars and brown dwarfs of IC 348 aren’t the only attractions in this image. A brilliantly detailed collection of protostars occupies the upper right corner. Several of these protostars are accompanied by Herbig-Haro objects, which are luminous regions that form when jets from growing newborn stars crash into the gas and dust around the star. The long, narrow feature that is oriented horizontally in this corner is the Herbig-Haro object HH 797 . Upon close inspection, this source is revealed to be two protostars with nearly parallel outflows. Just to the right of HH 797 is the propeller-shaped source HH 211 , which features both narrow jets and broader outflows. IC 348 Collage This collage features a collection of insets from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s image of star-forming region IC 348: embedded stars, a central star cluster, faint outflows, Herbig-Haro objects, gravitational lensing, and spiral galaxies. Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, Kevin Luhman (PSU), Catarina Alves de Oliveira (ESA), Mahdi Zamani (ESA/Webb) The data used to create this image comes from the Webb General Observer Program 4866 . In addition to studying the lowest-mass objects created through the star-formation process, this program also seeks to understand how the populations of planetary-mass objects like brown dwarfs vary between star-forming regions, as well as the origins of the hydrocarbon feature in the lowest-mass brown dwarfs. The James Webb Space Telescope is the world’s premier space science observatory. Webb is solving mysteries in our solar system, looking beyond to distant worlds around other stars, and probing the mysterious structures and origins of our universe and our place in it. Webb is an international program led by NASA with its partners, ESA (European Space Agency) and CSA (Canadian Space Agency). To learn more about Webb, visit: https://science.nasa.gov/webb Downloads & Related Information The following sections contain links to download this article's images and videos in all available resolutions followed by related information links, media contacts, and if available, research paper and Spanish translation links. Related Images & Videos IC 348 (NIRCam Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope recently observed IC 348, a star-forming region just 1,000 light-years away from Earth. Webb’s sharp vision revealed tiny brown dwarfs, some just twice Jupiter’s mass, and young stars ejecting powerful jets crashing into surrounding gas and dust. IC 348 Collage This collage features a collection of insets from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s image of star-forming region IC 348: embedded stars, a central star cluster, faint outflows, Herbig-Haro objects, gravitational lensing, and spiral galaxies. Related Links Read more: NASA’s Webb Identifies Tiniest Free-Floating Brown Dwarf View more: Star cluster IC 348 View more: Brown Dwarfs in IC 348 Read more: Webb Science: Star Lifecycle View more: Chandra and Webb composite of the star-forming region IC 348 More Webb: News | Images | Science | Home Page Share Details Last Updated Sep 21, 2026 Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Laura Betz NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland laura.e.betz@nasa.gov Bethany Downer ESA/Webb Baltimore, Maryland Christine Pulliam Space Telescope Science Institute Baltimore, Maryland Related Terms James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Astrophysics Astrophysics Division Brown Dwarfs Goddard Space Flight Center Nebulae Reflection Nebulae Science & Research Stars The Universe Keep Exploring Related Topics James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Stars Stars Stories Universe

Galaxies Stories Filters NASA’s Hubble Seeks Lensed Supernova, Marks 200,000 Orbits 2 min read NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope completed its 200,000th orbit around Earth on Sept. 19, marking another new milestone for an observatory that continues to transform our understanding of the universe. Hubble has traveled more than 5 billion miles around Earth over… Article NASA’s Hubble Spots an Out-of-Sync Galaxy 3 min read Though the spiral galaxy in this new image from the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope seems serene, it hides a chaotic secret. This galaxy is NGC 4698, and it lies about 55 million light-years away in the constellation Virgo. It’s one of over a… Article NASA’s Chandra Unveils Mysterious X-Ray Objects 5 min read Using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, scientists have discovered a new class of objects behaving unlike any they have seen before. Astronomers suggest these newly spotted objects in other galaxies may help solve not one, but two long-standing questions in astrophysics.… Article

Explore Hubble 2 min read NASA’s Hubble Seeks Lensed Supernova, Marks 200,000 Orbits NASA Hubble Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center Sep 23, 2026 Article An image from NASA's Hubble Space Telescope of galaxy cluster MACS J0417 is part of repeated observations to monitor for the reappearance of supernova Athena, which can help astronomers measure the expansion rate of the universe. NASA, ESA, STScI, M. Pascale (UCLA); Image Processing: J. DePasquale (STScI) NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope completed its 200,000th orbit around Earth on Sept. 19, marking another new milestone for an observatory that continues to transform our understanding of the universe. Hubble has traveled more than 5 billion miles around Earth over its 36-year lifetime, exceeding 1.7 million total observations. An observation completed on the day of the 200,000th orbit pertains to one of Hubble’s defining scientific legacies: measuring the expansion rate of the universe, or the Hubble Constant. The image takes advantage of the telescope’s ability to return to the same regions of the sky over time to monitor for the reappearance of a supernova, or explosion of a star, called Athena. Massive galaxy cluster MACS J0417, located at the left center of the image, acts as a gravitational lens , bending and magnifying light from objects far behind it. Light from a supernova can reach Earth along multiple paths, causing the same stellar explosion to appear more than once at times separated by months or even years depending on the path it took. Supernova Athena, discovered by NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope in 2025, is predicted to reappear between now and early March 2027. Measuring the timing of Athena’s reappearances can help researchers map the mass of MACS J0417, which acts as a magnifying, foreground lens for distant objects, and refine our understanding of the expansion rate of the universe. After more than 36 years in space, Hubble still is reaching new heights of scientific productivity and impact. Hubble’s unique ability to observe and analyze light in ultraviolet and visible wavelengths complements NASA’s James Webb and Roman Space Telescopes’ capabilities. As a result, demand for Hubble observing time remains high as astronomers request about seven times as much observing time as is available each year. Hubble continues to observe targets across every area of astronomy around the clock, with real-time tracking of those observations available on NASA’s website . Facebook logo @NASAHubble @NASAHubble Instagram logo @NASAHubble Media Contact : Claire Andreoli NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center , Greenbelt, MD claire.andreoli@nasa.gov Share Details Last Updated Sep 24, 2026 Editor Michelle Belleville Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Related Terms Hubble Space Telescope Astrophysics Astrophysics Division Galaxies Goddard Space Flight Center The Universe Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Hubble Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble’s Galaxies Explore an assortment of galaxies with Hubble. Hubble Science Highlights Hubble's most notable scientific discoveries reflect the broad range of research and the breakthroughs it has achieved. Hubble Images Explore Hubble's iconic images of the universe, and view photos of mission operations and astronauts servicing Hubble in space.

Explore Hubble 3 min read NASA’s Hubble Spots an Out-of-Sync Galaxy NASA Hubble Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center Sep 18, 2026 Article The spiral galaxy NGC 4698 shines in this image from the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope. ESA/Hubble & NASA, D. Thilker, the MAUVE-HST Team Though the spiral galaxy in this new image from the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope seems serene, it hides a chaotic secret. This galaxy is NGC 4698, and it lies about 55 million light-years away in the constellation Virgo. It’s one of over a thousand galaxies in the Virgo Cluster, the nearest large cluster of galaxies bound together by gravity. As a spiral galaxy similar to our own Milky Way galaxy, NGC 4698 has spiral arms that curl around within a thin disk of stars, gas, and dust. These arms are marked by opaque clumps of brown dust and dotted with small collections of bright blue stars. Unlike many other spiral galaxies, like this one recently photographed by Hubble , NGC 4698’s delicate spiral arms are only prominent in the outer reaches of the disk; spiral arms often wind down to the very center of a galaxy, but NGC 4698’s spiral arms appear to shy away from its glowing center. The arms instead hover in a ring-like structure around the perimeter of the galaxy. NGC 4698’s center is dominated by an elongated galactic bulge . The diffuse off-white glow of the galaxy’s bulge comes from stars smaller, older, and cooler than the massive blue stars that dot the galaxy’s outer disk. These tightly packed stars orbit a supermassive black hole containing millions of times the Sun’s mass. Scientists have found signs that this black hole is actively growing, drawing gas inward with its gravitational pull. With a flat, starry disk and diffusely glowing center, NGC 4698 looks a lot like a typical spiral galaxy — but this galaxy is far from normal. NGC 4698 is one of only a few known spiral galaxies with a bulge that extends out from the disk at a right angle. The elongation is faintly visible in this Hubble image, which shows the ghostly glow of the starry bulge peeking above and below the dusty disk. What’s more, the stars and gas nearest the galaxy’s center rotate perpendicular to the rest of the disk! What could cause a galaxy to be so out of sync? Astronomers have found that the culprit likely lies outside the galaxy. If NGC 4698 funneled in gas from an outside source, the newly collected gas could have formed a disk of gas and stars in the galaxy’s center, at an angle relative to the rest of the disk. Some observations suggest that this galaxy once experienced a minor galactic merger, as evidenced by a short ‘tail’ of hydrogen streaming from one side of the galaxy. The data used to create this image come from an observing program focusing on galaxies in the Virgo Cluster. This program zooms in on the details of these relatively nearby galaxies, such as individual star clusters and nebulae. At the same time, researchers will use these data to take stock of the larger picture, learning how a galaxy’s journey through a cluster affects the galaxy’s evolution and ability to form new stars. Text credit: ESA/Hubble Facebook logo @NASAHubble @NASAHubble Instagram logo @NASAHubble Media Contact : Claire Andreoli NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center , Greenbelt, MD claire.andreoli@nasa.gov Explore More Hubble's Galaxies Our galaxy, the Milky Way, sits in a Local Group of more than 20 galaxies, but Hubble’s vision takes us far beyond our celestial neighborhood. Discover how Hubble's studies have transformed our understanding of galaxies near and far. Hubble Focus: Galaxies through Space and Time Explore the history of galaxies through Hubble's gaze in this free, downloadable e-book. Spectacular Hubble images and videos bring home the discoveries that have expanded our understanding of galaxies, how they formed, and what they contain. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Hubble Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble’s Beautiful Universe Hubble Science Operations Hubble Mission Operations

Black Hole Stories Filters 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 1 min read NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is set to launch at 7:26 a.m. EDT on Sunday, Aug. 30. While you wait to watch the launch, brush up on some key facts about this wide-view mission. To learn more about the… Article NASA’s Swift Sees ‘Wandering’ Mega Black Hole Shredding Star 6 min read NASA’s Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory captured an “orphan” black hole lighting up as it devoured a star on the outskirts of a faraway galaxy. These phenomena are rare to begin with, and none had ever before been seen so far… Article NASA’s Roman Telescope Will Spot Distant Black Holes That Shred Stars 6 min read Lee esta nota de prensa en español aquí. How do black holes at the center of galaxies form and grow over time? To answer this question, scientists need to detect and study supermassive black holes at great distances, which existed much… Article

1 min read 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Ashley Balzer Aug 27, 2026 Article NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is set to launch at 7:26 a.m. EDT on Sunday, Aug. 30. While you wait to watch the launch , brush up on some key facts about this wide-view mission. Teams inside the Payload Hazardous Servicing Facility at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida encapsulate the agency’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope within the payload fairing on Friday, Aug. 21, 2026, ahead of mating to a SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket. Encapsulation shields the spacecraft during rollout, ascent, and the early phases of flight. Roman will investigate dark energy and dark matter, conduct a statistical census of planetary systems, and enable a broad range of additional astrophysics research. Liftoff from Launch Complex 39A at Kennedy is targeted for no earlier than Sunday, Aug. 30, 2026. NASA/Sydney Rohde (Rocz) 01 The mission is named after NASA’s first chief astronomer, Dr. Nancy Grace Roman. Roman is named after Dr. Nancy Grace Roman (1925–2018), NASA’s first chief of astronomy. She championed space-based observatories that could study the universe above Earth’s hazy atmosphere while making their data broadly available to the scientific community. While she’s known as the “mother” of the Hubble Space Telescope, Roman played an even broader role as the driving force behind NASA’s entire Great Observatories program, which included Hubble along with the Chandra X-ray Observatory and the retired Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and Spitzer Space Telescope. Her vision and leadership helped establish NASA as a world-class scientific institution and laid the foundation for generations of space telescopes that continue to expand humanity’s understanding of the cosmos. 02 Roman will transform our view of the cosmos by showing us the bigger picture. Roman will pair a large field of view with crisp infrared vision to scan vast, deep swaths of sky. This flagship mission is designed to help astronomers explore dark matter , dark energy , and planets outside our solar system, called exoplanets . Since each of Roman’s surveys will sample such a large volume of the cosmos, the mission will also offer practically limitless opportunities for astronomers to conduct a broad range of additional science. From objects in our outer solar system and exploding stars to growing black holes and galaxies by the billions, very little will be beyond Roman’s reach. Roman’s data will be made public as soon as it’s processed, allowing many teams to analyze it simultaneously. 03 The observatory will journey a million miles to join Webb at Lagrange point 2. Roman will orbit 1 million miles away at the second Sun-Earth Lagrange point (L2), the same location as NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope. At L2, gravity from the Sun and Earth works together with an object’s motion around the Sun to hold it roughly in place. This balance will give Roman a relatively steady orbit without using much fuel. Like Webb, Roman will trace out a large orbit around the actual L2 point — much larger than the Moon’s orbit around Earth — and the two will easily be kept far apart. 04 The spacecraft carries the names of more than a million people. This summer, everyone was invited to submit their name to be added to a memory card attached to a plaque on the Roman spacecraft. More than 1.3 million people did so and will have their names carried all the way to L2. 05 Roman will scan the skies for at least five years. Roman will have a primary mission lifetime of five years and is designed to support an additional five-year extended mission. Fuel is expected to be the mission’s life-limiting resource, and while NASA does not currently have an ability to service observatories at L2, Roman is designed to be refuelable. 06 Two instruments will enable myriad discoveries. The observatory’s Wide Field Instrument is a 300-megapixel infrared camera that will give Roman the same sharpness (angular resolution) as Hubble but with a field of view at least 100 times larger. Using this instrument, each Roman image will capture a patch of the sky about 1.5 times bigger than the apparent size of a full Moon. Roman’s Coronagraph Instrument is designed to demonstrate the most advanced technologies ever flown in space for directly imaging planets around other stars. It will block the glare from stars and make it possible for scientists to see the faint reflected light from planets in orbit around them, revealing giant worlds that are older, colder, and in closer orbits than the hot, young super-Jupiters direct imaging has mainly revealed so far. 07 Roman joins an international cohort of teamworking telescopes. Roman will work in tandem with many other NASA-led and international missions to provide the most complete view of our universe yet. Roman’s large panoramas will uncover interesting targets that Hubble could follow up on using infrared, visible, and ultraviolet light to offer a more comprehensive view. NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope can then use its larger mirror and more powerful vision to deliver even more detailed, ultra-sharp observations. And Roman can view regions around objects Hubble or Webb observe to offer context. Euclid, an ESA (European Space Agency) mission with key contributions from NASA, will observe a larger area of the sky than Roman, though with less detail. Since their survey areas will overlap, scientists can use Roman’s higher-quality data to apply corrections to Euclid’s, then extend these refinements over Euclid’s much larger area. Scientists can also pair Roman’s infrared data with visible-light observations from the ground-based Vera C. Rubin Observatory, a National Science Foundation–Department of Energy collaboration. That will allow astronomers to inch closer to achieving Roman-like quality over Rubin’s much greater sky coverage. By showcasing technology to directly photograph Jupiter-like exoplanets, Roman will also provide a crucial stepping stone for NASA’s Habitable Worlds Observatory concept, a flagship space telescope that would be designed to photograph Earth-like planets in other solar systems for the first time ever. 08 Watch the Roman launch live from anywhere. NASA will stream this event live through a variety of platforms. Learn where to watch online: nasa.gov/live . The launch broadcast will continue until approximately one hour past launch to follow the first several critical milestones post-launch. 09 NASA expects to share Roman’s first images by early 2027. The Roman team will complete a carefully orchestrated series of deployments, calibrations, and tests in the three months following launch before the observatory reaches its final orbit. Science operations begin once this commissioning period is completed, starting with the release of Roman’s first science images. To learn more about the Roman mission, visit: https://www.nasa.gov/roman Media contact: Claire Andreoli NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. claire.andreoli@nasa.gov 301-286-1940 Share Details Last Updated Aug 27, 2026 Editor Ashley Balzer Contact Ashley Balzer ashley.m.balzer@nasa.gov Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Related Terms Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Black Holes Dark Energy Dark Matter Exoplanets Galaxies Stars The Universe Explore More 7 min read Journey to Center of Milky Way With Upcoming NASA Roman Core Survey At the heart of our own galaxy, there is a dense thicket of stars with… Article 8 months ago 7 min read Core Survey by NASA’s Roman Mission Will Unveil Universe’s Dark Side The broadest planned survey by NASA’s upcoming Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will reveal hundreds… Article 8 months ago 6 min read NASA Roman Core Survey Will Trace Cosmic Expansion Over Time NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will be a discovery machine, thanks to its wide… Article 1 year ago

6 min read NASA’s Swift Sees ‘Wandering’ Mega Black Hole Shredding Star Ashley Balzer Jul 27, 2026 Article Contents Hidden heavyweights Oddball origin story This artist's concept depicts a tidal disruption event, which occurs when a star passes fatally close to a supermassive black hole. Crumbs of the splintering star heat up as they swirl around the black hole, creating a glow astronomers can see from far across the cosmos, and the black hole launches a relativistic jet into space. NRAO/AUI/NSF/NASA NASA’s Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory captured an “orphan” black hole lighting up as it devoured a star on the outskirts of a faraway galaxy. These phenomena are rare to begin with, and none had ever before been seen so far outside of a galaxy’s core. “We were looking for these star-shredding events as a way to find otherwise invisible supermassive black holes wandering away from the galactic cores where they usually reside,” said Robert Stein, a research fellow at The University of Maryland, College Park and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. “With this discovery, which is one of just a couple that have been confirmed so far, we’ve validated a new technique and can use it to hunt for more.” A paper describing the results, led by Stein, was published Monday in The Astrophysical Journal Letters. Researchers saw an ultrabright flare unleashed by a star being torn apart by extreme gravitational forces after drifting too close to a monster black hole — a phenomenon called a tidal disruption event. The black hole behind the blast weighs in at about a million times the Sun’s mass. Its existence was first flagged in November 2025 as an unusual brightening in a galaxy about 750 million light-years away by ZTF (Zwicky Transient Facility), a survey conducted by the Palomar Observatory in Southern California. “Out of the half million flashes ZTF detects each night, our new artificial intelligence algorithm automatically recognized a flare that looked a lot like a tidal disruption event, despite its unusual location in the outskirts of a galaxy,” Stein said. For a few months, the tidal disruption event outshone its entire host galaxy in ultraviolet wavelengths, temporarily radiating with the light of about 10 billion suns. This gif shows the galaxy WISEA J014656.04-152214.7, located about 750 million light-years away in the constellation Cetus, before and after a tidal disruption event was spotted on its outer edge in November 2025. The image at left was taken by the DESI (Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument) Legacy Survey and the one at right is from the Lowell Discovery Telescope. Lowell Discovery Telescope/Legacy Survey/Robert Stein Other telescopes, including the SOAR (Southern Astrophysical Research) telescope in Chile, followed up on the ZTF source to look at the event’s spectrum, which revealed features supporting that it was likely a tidal disruption event. Astronomers then used NASA’s Swift to look at wavelengths they can’t detect with ground-based telescopes to uncover new information. For example, Swift’s UVOT (Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope) took the blip’s temperature and found that it had quite a fever at about 54,000 degrees Fahrenheit (30,000 degrees Celsius). “The combination of all this data helped us rule out other explanations and confidently say it’s a tidal disruption event, despite its strange location,” said Jonathan Carney, a doctoral student at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, who took the first spectra that supported the flare’s interpretation as a tidal disruption event. Hidden heavyweights Nearly every galaxy in the universe is anchored by a supermassive black hole sitting right in the center. About once every 100,000 years, a star will drift too close to this invisible heavyweight and trigger a tidal disruption event. While they’re rather rare in any given galaxy, scientists scour millions of galaxies for them. Each year, astronomical surveys typically spot about 30 tidal disruption events occurring somewhere in the universe. Prior to 2024, they’d only been seen in galaxy cores. That’s partly because astronomers mainly looked for them there; after all, it’s where all the known supermassive black holes were, and you can’t get a tidal disruption event without one (the gravitational pull of lighter black holes isn’t strong enough). Then scientists saw the telltale signs of a star being shredded 2,600 light-years from the center of its host galaxy. That inspired more astronomers to look beyond galaxy cores for similar events, and now a team has identified one more than 30,000 light-years away from a galaxy’s center. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This video visualizes a star approaching a supermassive black hole so closely that it's stretched to a breaking point by the black hole's strong gravity. Intense tidal forces crack the star open and hurl its gaseous guts outward. Stellar debris forms a spinning accretion disk as it continues to spiral into the black hole. NASA, ESA, STScI, Ralf Crawford (STScI) Oddball origin story So how did the newfound black hole become so off-kilter? “It must have originated in a galaxy’s center, but not the one it’s in the outskirts of now,” Stein said. “We think the host galaxy’s supermassive black hole is still at its core, but the one eating the star could have started off in a small galaxy that merged with the big one we see today.” The researchers have outlined two possibilities. Three or more galaxies may have merged together, and the gravitational tug-of-war between their central supermassive black holes may have flung the lightest black hole out to the galaxy’s edge. Or a dwarf galaxy could be midway through a merger. As the dwarf’s stars fell into the larger galaxy, one may have passed too close to the dwarf’s supermassive black hole. “Further discoveries could reveal the origin of this apparent ‘orphan’ black hole,” Stein said. “The key science question we want to answer is: How common are wandering black holes?” The answer may soon be within reach. “Pointed science observations with Swift's UVOT and XRT (X-Ray Telescope) instruments are temporarily suspended as the mission awaits an orbit boost , which is planned for this summer ,” said co-author S. Bradley Cenko, Swift’s principal investigator at NASA Goddard. The spacecraft, whose primary mission ran from 2004 to 2006, is slowly sinking toward Earth due to atmospheric drag after more than 20 years of observations of the changing universe. Nudging it to a higher orbit could extend its lifetime even longer. “Once it resumes normal operations, Swift could continue searching for more examples of out-of-place black holes.” In the coming years, scientists will use the new technique to search for disintegrating stars in observations from the newly operational Vera C. Rubin Observatory, jointly funded by the U.S. Department of Energy and National Science Foundation, in Chile and NASA’s upcoming Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope . “Rubin’s wide, deep surveys will reveal a much larger sample of tidal disruption events than current observatories are capable of collecting, including ones that are off-center,” Carney said. “And Roman’s space-based surveys will extend the current search zone by seeing ones that are farther away, looking back through 9 billion years of cosmic history.” Adding their observations to Swift’s and those from ground-based observatories will bring astronomers closer than ever before to completing a census of the universe’s behemoth black holes. To learn more about the Swift mission, visit: https://nasa.gov/swift By Ashley Balzer NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center , Greenbelt, Md. Media contact: Claire Andreoli NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center , Greenbelt, Md. 301-286-1940 Facebook logo @NASAUNIVERSE @NASAUNIVERSE Instagram logo @NASAUNIVERSE Share Details Last Updated Jul 28, 2026 Editor Ashley Balzer Contact Ashley Balzer ashley.m.balzer@nasa.gov Location Goddard Space Flight Center Related Terms Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory Astrophysics Black Holes Galaxies, Stars, & Black Holes Galaxies, Stars, & Black Holes Research Goddard Space Flight Center Science & Research Supermassive Black Holes The Universe

Explore Hubble 5 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Discovers First of Star Cluster’s Missing Black Holes An image of the globular cluster Omega Centauri, a collection of myriad stars colored red, white, and blue on the black background of space. Credits: Science: Maximilian Häberle (MPIA) NASA Hubble Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center Jul 13, 2026 Article The massive globular star cluster Omega Centauri has puzzled astronomers for decades. It should be filled with black holes left behind by exploding stars, yet evidence for them is scarce. Now, astronomers using archival data from NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope and supportive observations from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope have finally located their first stellar-mass black hole in this cluster. Discovering the first of this missing black hole population will help refine current theories on black hole formation within environments such as Omega Centauri. The team’s findings published Monday in The Astrophysical Journal Letters . Omega Centauri is composed of 10 million gravitationally bound stars. Though the astronomical community previously found evidence with Hubble that an intermediate-mass black hole lurks at its center, models suggest this star cluster should also contain about 10,000 smaller, stellar-mass black holes. This notable population of black holes evaded detection in previous observational studies, which used the radial velocity method or looked for radio and X-ray emission from material falling onto black holes. This new discovery features a different approach, known as astrometry , to measure very small movements of stars over time. By sifting through more than 20 years of Hubble archival data and pulling in recent Webb data to further refine their astrometric measurements, the team located a star orbiting an invisible object so hefty that it has to be a black hole. Dubbed oMEGACat BH-2, it is the first stellar-mass black hole detected in Omega Centauri, and it has some surprising qualities. oMEGACat BH-2 has a lower-than-expected mass and, with its visible star companion, the black hole-star duo has the longest orbital period of any black hole binary system known to date. “With Hubble and Webb data, we were able to see the motion of the visible main sequence star that is part of this binary, which is about 18,000 light-years away in the dense environment of Omega Centauri,” said Matthew Whitaker of the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, lead author of the paper. “The precision of these measurements is incredible, down to a fraction of a pixel on Hubble and Webb’s detectors. It would not have been possible to find this black hole without these two space telescopes.” Astronomers found Omega Centauri’s first stellar-mass black hole, which has a visible star companion that is shown in greater detail. They used 20-plus years of data from NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope and recent data from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope to make the discovery. Image: ESA, NASA, Maximilian Häberle (MPIA), Joseph DePasquale (STScI) The team’s findings refine a past study by a different group of scientists that suggested this binary system included a neutron star. By expanding Hubble data from the earlier investigation with archival Hubble astrometric measurements from 2002 to 2023, and pulling in Webb near-infrared data to improve precision, the University of Utah-led team was able to better constrain the mass of the visible star’s dark companion, ruling out the neutron star possibility. “While we already knew that the star was 0.78 solar masses, we can now calculate the black hole’s mass, which is 4.46 solar masses and therefore too heavy to be a neutron star. However, its mass is much lower than would be expected in a metal-poor environment like Omega Centauri. This is surprising and exciting,” said Anil Seth of the University of Utah, a coauthor of the study. “We now know that a metal-poor star is able to form a black hole like this, and we need to figure out how that happens. This detection is providing some data to those who do that kind of modeling.” Long time coming Based on the precise data from Hubble and Webb, the team could chart the star’s path over 20-plus years, during its closest approach to its black hole companion when it moved the fastest across the sky. From the extensive data, the team determined that the visible star orbits oMEGACat BH-2 once every 94 years, making it the longest-period black hole binary ever known. Its long orbital period also gives a clue to the origin of this binary system. It was probably dynamically formed, meaning the star and its black hole companion did not start out together but rather found each other in this cluster. The researchers calculated that a system like oMEGACat BH-2 will survive for less than a billion years before it is torn apart by encounters with nearby stars, a much shorter span than the age of the cluster (approximately 12 billion years old). “It's important to understand black hole populations in globular clusters because there's uncertainty about their physics and formation,” said Seth. “More specifically, understanding the process of forming black holes and then dynamically forming binaries is vital, because it affects our ability to interpret and understand gravitational wave events . Environments like Omega Centauri are the primary places where we think binaries are merging and creating these waves.” The team’s discovery of stellar-mass black hole oMEGACat BH-2 with the Hubble-Webb dataset is just the start of finding these evasive black hole populations in globular star clusters. “With Hubble and Webb, we can continue to look at Omega Centauri and expand our search for similar systems within other clusters,” said Whitaker. “We’re also very excited for the launch of NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope because it will image the crowded galactic bulge, including the galactic center , very regularly with Hubble-like resolution and with a much wider field of view. We’re hoping we’ll be able to find black hole binary systems like this one because of the regular cadence of Roman’s observations.” The Hubble Space Telescope has been operating for over three decades and continues to make ground-breaking discoveries that shape our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble is a project of international cooperation between NASA and ESA (European Space Agency). NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, manages the telescope and mission operations. Lockheed Martin Space, based in Denver, also supports mission operations at Goddard. The Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, which is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, conducts Hubble science operations for NASA. Facebook logo @NASAHubble @NASAHubble Instagram logo @NASAHubble Related Images & Videos Omega Centauri Context Image Astronomers found Omega Centauri’s first stellar-mass black hole, which has a visible star companion that is shown in greater detail. They used 20-plus years of data from NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope and recent data from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope to make the discovery. Star Orbiting Black Hole Animation The precise data collected by NASA’s Hubble and James Webb space telescopes enabled a team of astronomers to chart the visible star’s orbital path over a 20 year-plus period. Share Details Last Updated Aug 12, 2026 Editor Andrea Gianopoulos Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Claire Andreoli NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland claire.andreoli@nasa.gov Abigail Major, Christine Pulliam Space Telescope Science Institute Baltimore, Maryland Related Terms Hubble Space Telescope Astrophysics Astrophysics Division Black Holes Globular Clusters Goddard Space Flight Center James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Stars Related Links and Documents Academic Paper: A Long Period Stellar-mass Black Hole Binary in Omega Centauri This release on the ESA/Hubble website. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Hubble Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble Science Highlights Hubble's most notable scientific discoveries reflect the broad range of research and the breakthroughs it has achieved. Hubble Images Explore Hubble's iconic images of the universe, and view photos of mission operations and astronauts servicing Hubble in space. Caldwell 80 Better known as Omega Centauri, Caldwell 80 is home to around 10 million stars.

Explore the Universe Cosmic History Contents The Universe’s History Cosmic Inflation Big Bang and Nucleosynthesis Recombination Dark Ages First Stars Reionization The Future The Universe’s History The origin, evolution, and nature of the universe have fascinated and confounded humankind for centuries. New ideas and major discoveries made during the 20th century transformed cosmology – the term for the way we conceptualize and study the universe – although much remains unknown. Here is the history of the universe according to cosmologists’ current theories. Cosmic Inflation Around 13.8 billion years ago, the universe expanded faster than the speed of light for a fraction of a second, a period called cosmic inflation. Scientists aren’t sure what came before inflation or what powered it. It’s possible that energy during this period was just part of the fabric of space-time. Cosmologists think inflation explains many aspects of the universe we observe today, like its flatness, or lack of curvature, on the largest scales. Inflation may have also magnified density differences that naturally occur on space’s smallest, quantum-level scales, which eventually helped form the universe’s large-scale structures. NASA Big Bang and Nucleosynthesis When cosmic inflation stopped, the energy driving it transferred to matter and light – the big bang. One second after the big bang, the universe consisted of an extremely hot (18 billion degrees Fahrenheit or 10 billion degrees Celsius) primordial soup of light and particles. In the following minutes, an era called nucleosynthesis, protons and neutrons collided and produced the earliest elements – hydrogen, helium, and traces of lithium and beryllium. After five minutes, most of today’s helium had formed, and the universe had expanded and cooled enough that further element formation stopped. At this point, though, the universe was still too hot for the atomic nuclei of these elements to catch electrons and form complete atoms. The cosmos was opaque because a vast number of electrons created a sort of fog that scattered light. Recombination Around 380,000 years after the big bang, the universe had cooled enough that atomic nuclei could capture electrons, a period astronomers call the epoch of recombination. This had two major effects on the cosmos. First, with most electrons now bound into atoms, there were no longer enough free ones to completely scatter light, and the cosmic fog cleared. The universe became transparent, and for the first time, light could freely travel over great distances. Second, the formation of these first atoms produced its own light. This glow, still detectable today, is called the cosmic microwave background. It is the oldest light we can observe in the universe. Scientists used nine years of data from NASA’s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe to create this detailed, all-sky image of the cosmic microwave background. The image reveals 13.8-billion-year-old temperature fluctuations (shown as different colors) – seeds that grew into the galaxies we see today. NASA/WMAP Science Team Dark Ages After the cosmic microwave background, the universe again became opaque at shorter wavelengths due to the absorbing effects of all those hydrogen atoms. For the next 200 million years the universe remained dark. There were no stars to shine. The cosmos at this point consisted of a sea of hydrogen atoms, helium, and trace amounts of heavier elements. First Stars Gas was not uniformly distributed throughout the universe. Cooler areas of space were lumpier, with denser clouds of gas. As these clumps grew more massive, their gravity attracted additional matter. As they became denser, and more compact, the centers of these clumps became hotter – hot enough eventually that nuclear fusion occurred in their centers. These were the first stars. They were 30 to 300 times more massive than our Sun and millions of times brighter. Over several hundred million years, the first stars collected into the first galaxies. Reionization At first, starlight couldn’t travel far because it was scattered by the relatively dense gas surrounding the first stars. Gradually, the ultraviolet light emitted by these stars broke down, or ionized, hydrogen atoms in the gas into their constituent electrons and protons. As this reionization progressed, starlight traveled farther, breaking up more and more hydrogen atoms. By the time the universe was 1 billion years old, stars and galaxies had transformed nearly all this gas, making the universe transparent to light as we see it today. The Future For many years, scientists thought the universe’s current expansion was slowing down. But in fact, cosmic expansion is speeding up. In 1998, astronomers found that certain supernovae, bright stellar explosions, were fainter than expected. They concluded this could only happen if the supernovae had moved farther away, at a faster rate than predicted. Scientists suspect a mysterious substance they call dark energy is accelerating expansion. Future research may yield new surprises, but cosmologists suggest it’s likely the universe will continue to expand forever. Big Bang News 18 Min Read Cosmic Dawn with Nobel Laureate John Mather Article 6 Min Read Cosmic Mapmaker: NASA’s SPHEREx Space Telescope Ready to Launch 24 Min Read The Mind-Bending Math Inside Black Holes 6 Min Read How NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Illuminate Cosmic Dawn Article 11 Min Read What is Dark Energy? Inside our accelerating, expanding Universe Article Do NASA Science with Redshift Wrangler! Interested in exploring the timeline of cosmic history? Join NASA’s Redshift Wrangler citizen science project to help astronomers use light from distant galaxies to look back in time and make discoveries about the early universe. Grab your lasso and get involved Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Galaxies Black Holes Stars Exoplanets

Big Bang Stories Cosmic Mapmaker: NASA’s SPHEREx Space Telescope Ready to Launch 6 min read Editor’s note: This story was updated March 11, 2025, to reflect a new target launch date and time. NASA’s latest space observatory is targeting a March 11 liftoff, and the agency’s PUNCH heliophysics mission is sharing a ride. Here’s what… Article How NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Illuminate Cosmic Dawn 6 min read Today, enormous stretches of space are crystal clear, but that wasn’t always the case. During its infancy, the universe was filled with a “fog” that made it opaque, cloaking the first stars and galaxies. NASA’s upcoming Nancy Grace Roman Space… Article What is Dark Energy? Inside our accelerating, expanding Universe 11 min read Some 13.8 billion years ago, the universe began with a rapid expansion we call the big bang. After this initial expansion, which lasted a fraction of a second, gravity started to slow the universe down. But the cosmos wouldn’t stay… Article

Teams Complete Flight Readiness Review for NASA’s Roman Telescope Animation of Roman NASA Mission managers from NASA, the agency’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, and SpaceX conducted a Flight Readiness Review Friday, at the agency’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Teams provided updates and reviewed the mission’s status before certifying that the mission is ready to begin final launch preparation activities. NASA and SpaceX are targeting Roman’s launch no earlier than 7:26 a.m. EDT Sunday, Aug. 30, aboard a SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket from Launch Complex 39A at Kennedy. In the coming days, teams will transport the Roman observatory, encapsulated in Falcon Heavy’s fairing, to SpaceX’s hangar at pad 39A, where technicians will attach it to the rocket before sending it out to the launch pad. Roman, NASA’s newest space telescope, will change the way we see the universe and settle essential questions in astronomy, helping researchers understand how the universe has changed over time, what drives its expansion, and the worlds that exist beyond our solar system, known as exoplanets. Stay updated with the latest on the Roman mission: nasa.gov/roman Elyna Niles-Carnes August 21, 2026 12:49PM Categories

Explore the Universe Building Blocks Contents The Universe’s Building Blocks Normal Matter Dark Matter Dark Energy The Universe’s Building Blocks Everything scientists can observe in the universe, from people to planets, is made of matter. Matter is defined as any substance that has mass and occupies space. But there’s more to the universe than the matter we can see. Dark matter and dark energy are mysterious substances that affect and shape the cosmos, and scientists are still trying to figure them out. The universe is made up of three components: normal or visible matter (5%), dark matter (27%), and dark energy (68%). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Normal Matter Normal matter makes up everything we can directly observe. We can view it in visible light with our own eyes or through a telescope that can detect light we can’t see, like ultraviolet or infrared. Most normal matter is made up of atomic particles: protons, neutrons, and electrons. It can exist as a gas, solid, liquid, or plasma of charged particles. While normal matter is everywhere in our daily lives, it composes less than 5% of the total universe. Dark Matter Like ordinary matter, dark matter takes up space and holds mass. But it doesn’t reflect, absorb, or radiate light – at least not enough for us to detect yet. While scientists have measured that dark matter makes up about 27% of the cosmos, they’re not sure what it is. Theories include several kinds of as-yet unidentified types of particles that rarely interact with normal matter. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope captured the magnificent starry population of the Coma galaxy cluster, one of the densest-known galaxy collections. The view, spanning several million light-years across, covers a large portion near the cluster’s center. NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA) Astronomers didn’t even know dark matter existed until the 20th century. In the 1930s, Swiss astronomer Fritz Zwicky coined the term while studying the Coma galaxy cluster, which contains more than 1,000 galaxies. The speed at which galaxies within a galaxy cluster move depends on the cluster’s total mass and size. Zwicky noticed that galaxies in the Coma cluster were moving faster than could be explained by the amount of matter astronomers could see there. It wasn’t until the 1970s that U.S. astronomer Vera Rubin confirmed the existence of dark matter by studying how individual galaxies rotated. She and her colleagues found that individual galaxies may contain invisible mass made of dark matter. Scientists today think dark matter exists in a vast, web-like structure that winds through the whole universe – a gravitational scaffold that attracts most of the cosmos’ normal matter. They’ve determined that dark matter isn’t composed of known particles of matter because the universe would look very different if it were. The search for what makes up dark matter continues. Dark Energy Dark energy may compose roughly 68% of the universe, but scientists know even less about it than they do about dark matter. But something like dark energy must exist to explain the universe’s accelerating expansion. Since the late 1920s, astronomers have known that the universe is expanding. In the 1990s, observations of distant star explosions, called supernovae, showed that the universe expanded more slowly in the past than it does now. The reason for this remains unclear, but the leading explanation is that the universe contains something that has a repulsive gravitational effect – it pushes the universe apart instead of pulling it back together. This phenomenon is called dark energy. Do NASA Science with Dark Energy Explorers! There’s an unknown force driving galaxies apart: dark energy! As a Dark Energy Explorer, you’ll help scientists map galaxies in the early universe, revealing how dark energy has influenced our universe over time. Start exploring Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Galaxies Black Holes Stars Exoplanets

1 min read Become a Dark Energy Explorer! NASA Science Editorial Team Jan 06, 2023 Article Become a Dark Energy Explorer, help map the distant universe and figure out what makes it expand faster and faster! Dark energy makes the whole universe expand faster and faster! But what causes this spectacular process? Join NASA’s newest citizen science project, Dark Energy Explorers, and help figure out this puzzle. At Dark Energy Explorers, you’ll look through images of distant galaxies and other data to help build a map of the universe, focusing on the region about 10 billion light years away. The images come from the Hobby-Eberly Telescope Dark Energy Experiment, based at The University of Texas at Austin's McDonald Observatory. Various explanations for dark energy predict different changes in the expansion rate. Those changes will affect the map in different ways—so your work will help astrophysicists use the map to sort through the possibilities. Learn More https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/erinmc/dark-energy-explorers Learn more about dark energy and why NASA studies it. For information about NASA’s next observatory set to study the mysteries of dark energy and dark matter, visit the Nancy Grace Roman Telescope website . NASA’s Citizen Science Program: Learn about NASA citizen science projects Follow on Twitter Follow on Facebook Share Details Last Updated Sep 18, 2023 Related Terms Citizen Science

Explore This Section 3 min read Help Refine Data from Space Telescopes with Artifact InSPECtor NASA Science Editorial Team Sep 11, 2026 Article How do scientists studying space with data from a telescope hundreds of thousands of miles away know that what they are seeing is real? A new NASA project, Artifact InSPECtor , invites you to find out – and by doing so, to help missions like Euclid and NASA’s new Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope answer fundamental questions about our universe. "It’s really cool that we can help teach computers new skills," said nine-year-old Maeve F. after trying out Artifact InSPECtor. Participants of all ages, including those as young as Maeve, can visit the project to learn how they can contribute to science by training artificial intelligence to remove errors in telescope data. Here's how it works. The Euclid space telescope, a powerful observatory built by ESA (European Space Agency) with critical contributions from NASA, is collecting light from millions of distant galaxies across the universe. It will soon be joined by NASA's Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, a complementary observatory that will capture a similar number of galaxies after it begins science operations, but at different distances and densities across the sky. Together, these telescopes promise to help scientists answer questions about the expansion of the universe and dark energy – the mysterious force causing this expansion. To collect data to answer these questions, each telescope uses a special instrument called a spectrograph that works like a prism: it splits the light from each galaxy, even very distant ones, into a rainbow of colors. By studying these rainbow patterns, called spectra, scientists can figure out how far away each galaxy is, what kinds of stars it contains, and even information about the supermassive black holes at their centers. But before that can happen, there's a problem to solve. Telescope data contains many "artifacts" – the general name scientists use for signals that come from things other than real astronomical objects like galaxies or stars. Artifacts can be created by light glinting off the telescope's housing, cosmic rays striking the detector, quirks in the camera or electronics, or other sources. It's a bit like when a smudge on your phone's camera lens shows up in a photo, or when a glare from the Sun blocks part of your picture. To find and remove these artifacts, astronomers have created artificial intelligence (AI) tools that learn to recognize them, similar to how your phone recognizes faces in photos. But recognizing artifacts in data from relatively new instruments is challenging work for the AI, which doesn’t always distinguish them accurately That's where you come in! As a volunteer with Artifact InSPECtor, you'll look at real space telescope data from Euclid and, starting in early 2027, the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. The project will teach you how to recognize artifacts in data from these telescopes. The work you do will then be used to improve the instructions guiding the AI tool. Working together, you, the AI, the scientists, and these powerful space telescopes will learn more than ever before about how our universe works. If you want to teach computers new skills and help discover the mysteries of dark energy, use your smartphone, tablet, or computer to visit Artifact InSPECtor and begin today: https://go.nasa.gov/3Uyrguy . Examples of what artifacts can look like in space telescope data. The blue areas indicate pixels that the AI model thinks are invalid. Artifact InSPECtor volunteers will learn how to verify whether the machine got it right. Credit: Image data from the ESA/Euclid Q1 Data release. Image processing by Aimee Schechter and Bharath C. Nagam. Learn More and Get Involved Artifact InSPECtor Train the tools used to remove artifacts from the data collected by space telescopes. For anyone with a smartphone or laptop. Facebook logo @nasascience_ @nasascience_ Instagram logo @nasascience_ Linkedin logo @nasascience_

Explore This Section Dark Energy Explorers Help illuminate the mystery of dark energy - the unknown force that is driving galaxies away from one another! Dark Energy Explorers are creating the largest and most detailed map yet of galaxies in the early universe. They need your help to identify the faint, ancient, distant galaxies they want to include on the map. Your eyes are better for this task than any software yet developed! The resulting map will be compared to nearby galaxies to reveal how dark energy has influenced our universe through time. Go to Project Website about Dark Energy Explorers project task Examining data division Astrophysics where Online launched 2023 What you'll do Learn how to identify distant galaxies and black holes in spectral lines and images collected by the giant Hobby-Eberly telescope. Connect with other dark energy enthusiasts through the project Talk forum . Requirements Time to get started: 5-15 minutes to complete the tutorial. Equipment: Web-connected device. Knowledge: None. In project tutorial provides all instruction needed. Get started! Visit the project website . Click on the “Classify” tab in the upper right. Complete the project tutorial. Start looking for ancient galaxies and black holes! Learn More To learn more about the science, visit the project’s About page . You can also visit the Hobby-Eberle Telescope Experiment website to learn more about dark energy and the efforts underway to understand it. A representation of how the universe evolved over 13.77 billion years. The far left depicts the earliest moment we can now probe, when a period of "inflation" produced a burst of exponential growth in the universe. (Size is depicted by the vertical extent of the grid in this graphic.) For the next several billion years, the expansion of the universe gradually slowed as gravity pulled together the matter in the universe. More recently, the expansion has begun to speed up again thanks to the repulsive effects of dark energy. Visit https://hetdex.org/what-is-dark-energy/ for a more detailed explanation of this graphic. Credit: NASA/WMAP Science Team This screenshot from the project interface shows the different kinds of data participants evaluate as they look for galaxies. The boxes outlined in black, blue, green, yellow, and orange (upper left) show images from the telescope. A “spectrum” is shown in the bottom left panel, a plot showing how bright the galaxy candidate is across different wavelengths. If the blue dots and black lines of the spectrum overlap, the candidate may be a real galaxy. A round and bright yellow dot in the bottom right image is also a good sign of a real galaxy. Credit: Dark Energy Explorers Get to know the Dark Energy Explorers! Karl Gebhardt Professor and Research Scientist Read Bio Keely Finkelstein Professor and Research Scientist Read Bio Erin Cooper Research Scientist Read Bio Lindsay House Graduate Student Lead Read Bio Dustin Davis Graduate Student Read Bio Jose Saucedo Undergraduate Researcher Read Bio Mike Truong Undergraduate Researcher Read Bio Isaiah Pipkin Undergraduate Researcher Read Bio

3I/ATLAS Comet 3I/ATLAS NASA missions worked together to track and study this rare, interstellar comet as it passed through our solar system. NASA's 3I/ATLAS Observation Timeline See all the NASA 3I/ATLAS Images July 1, 2025: First Sighting Reported The ATLAS survey telescope in Chile first reported its sighting of interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS to the Minor Planet Center. Read More July 21, 2025: Hubble Helps Estimate Size Images from NASA's Hubble Space Telescope helped astronomers estimate the size of 3I/ATLAS. Read More Aug. 6, 2025: JWST Observes 3I/ATLAS The James Webb Space Telescope captured 3I/ATLAS with its Near-Infrared Spectrograph instrument. Read More Aug. 7-15, 2025: SPHEREx Sees Comet The SPHEREx Observatory collected data from 3I/ATLAS for about a week. Read More Sept. 8-9, 2025: Psyche Tracks the Comet The Psyche spacecraft captured four observations of 3I/ATLAS over eight hours. Read More Sept. 11-15, 2025: Stacked STEREO Images Comet 3I/ATLAS is visible by using colorized, stacked images collected over time by the STEREO mission. Read More Sept. 16, 2025: Lucy Mission Spots Comet On its way to the Trojan asteroids, the Lucy spacecraft spotted comet 3I/ATLAS from about 240 million miles away. Read More Sept. 20-Oct. 3, 2025: Tail Seen in PUNCH Images These combined images from the PUNCH mission show the comet's tail as a short elongation to the right. Read More Sept. 28, 2025: MAVEN Finds Hydrogen MAVEN's ultraviolet instrument images the Hydrogen atoms surrounding the comet. Read More Sept. 28-Oct. 10, 2025: Daily Images from PUNCH Stacked Combined images from PUNCH when the comet was between 231-235 million miles from Earth. Read More Oct. 2, 2025: MRO Sees Comet from Mars The HiRISE camera on the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter observed the comet from about 18.6 million miles away. Read More Oct. 4, 2025: Rover Finds Comet in the Night Sky Perseverance paused from its exploration of Mars and used its mastcam to take a picture of the comet. Read More Oct. 9, 2025: MAVEN Sees Comet's Coma Instruments on the MAVEN spacecraft at Mars show the halo of gas and dust, or coma, surrounding 3I/ATLAS. Read More Oct. 15-26, 2025: SOHO Sees 3I/ATLAS The ESA/NASA SOHO mission caught a glimpse of the interstellar comet. Read More Oct. 15-Nov. 5, 2025: Parker Captures Comet Image Near Sun Images from NASA's Parker Solar Probe offer a unique vantage point to observe the comet as it neared the Sun. Read More Nov. 6, 2025: Europa Clipper Sees 3I/ATLAS Learn about those of the NASA corps who make “space sailing” their career profession. Read More Nov. 30, 2025: Hubble Reobserves 3I/ATLAS NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope reobserved interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS with its Wide Field Camera 3 instrument. Read More Dec. 8-15, 2025: SPHEREx Sees Comet Brightening SPHEREx observations show the infrared light emitted by the dust, water, organic molecules, and carbon dioxide in 3I/ATLAS’s coma. Read More Jan. 15, 18-19, 2026: TESS Reobserves 3I/ATLAS NASA’s TESS observed the 3I/ATLAS during a special observation run to study the comet’s activity and rotation. Read More Learn more about 3I/ATLAS News about Comet 3I/ATLAS Feature: Mars Spacecraft See Comet Overview, Discovery, and Observing Image Gallery Follow Comet 3I/ATLAS's Journey Image: The First Sighting Lee sobre el cometa 3I/ATLAS en español aquí. News About Comet 3I/ATLAS NASA’s Webb Finds Clues to Ancient, Distant Origin of Comet 3I/ATLAS 4 min read As interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS began moving away from the Sun in December 2025, astronomers took the opportunity to turn NASA’s… Article NASA’s Webb Detects Methane on Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS 2 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has collected its first mid-infrared chemical fingerprint of an interstellar object during a recent revisit… Blog How Open NASA Data on Comet 3I/ATLAS Will Power Tomorrow’s Discoveries 5 min read The interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS will soon leave our solar system, never to return, but the observations of the comet will… Article Featured Story NASA’s Mars Spacecraft Capture Images of Comet 3I/ATLAS Two orbiters and a rover captured images of the interstellar object — from the closest location any of the agency’s… Read the Story Comet 3I/ATLAS: Overview, Discovery, Observing Overview Comet 3I/ATLAS is the third known object from outside our solar system to be discovered passing through our celestial neighborhood. Astronomers have categorized this object as interstellar because of the hyperbolic shape of its orbital path. (It does not follow a closed orbital path about the Sun.) When the orbit of 3I/ATLAS is traced into the past, the comet clearly originates from outside our solar system. Comet 3I/ATLAS posed no threat to Earth and remained far away. The closest it approached our planet was about 1.8 astronomical units (about 170 million miles, or 270 million kilometers). 3I/ATLAS reached its closest point to the Sun around Oct. 30, 2025, at a distance of about 1.4 au (130 million miles, or 210 million kilometers) — just inside the orbit of Mars. The interstellar comet’s size and physical properties continue to be investigated by astronomers around the world. 3I/ATLAS remained visible to ground-based telescopes through September 2025, after which it passed too close to the Sun to observe. It reappeared on the other side of the Sun in early December 2025, allowing for renewed observations . Animation of comet 3I/ATLAS's trajectory through our solar system. NASA/JPL Discovery The NASA-funded ATLAS (Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System) survey telescope in Rio Hurtado, Chile, first reported observations to the Minor Planet Center of comet 3I/ATLAS on July 1, 2025. Since the first report, observations made before the discovery were gathered from the archives of three different ATLAS telescopes around the world and Caltech’s Zwicky Transient Facility at the Palomar Observatory in San Diego County, California. These “pre-discovery” observations extend back to June 14, 2025. How this comet got its name: Comets are generally named for their discoverer(s), in this case the ATLAS survey team. The letter “I” is for “interstellar,” indicating that this object came from outside our solar system. It’s the third known interstellar object, hence the “3” in the name. Read more about NASA's discovery of comet 3I/ATLAS This animation shows the observations of comet 3I/ATLAS when it was discovered on July 1, 2025. The NASA-funded ATLAS survey telescope in Chile first reported that the comet originated from interstellar space. ATLAS/University of Hawaii/NASA NASA Assets Observing Comet 3I/ATLAS NASA's Hubble Space Telescope captured this image of interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS on July 21, 2025, when the comet was 277 million miles from Earth. Hubble revealed a teardrop-shaped cocoon of dust coming off of the comet's solid, icy nucleus. Because Hubble was tracking the comet moving along a hyperbolic trajectory, the stationary background stars are streaked in the exposure. Hubble’s continuing observations allow astronomers to more accurately estimate the size of the comet’s nucleus. Observations as of Aug. 20, 2025, indicate that the upper limit on its diameter is 3.5 miles (5.6 kilometers), though it could be as small as 1,444 feet (440 meters) across. NASA assets that gathered observations of 3I/ATLAS include: Hubble, Webb, TESS, Swift, SPHEREx, Perseverance Mars rover, MRO (Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter), MAVEN (Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN), Europa Clipper, Lucy, Psyche, Parker Solar Probe, PUNCH, and ESA/NASA’s SOHO. Read more about the Hubble image Hubble captured this image of the interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS on July 21, 2025, when the comet was 277 million miles from Earth. Hubble shows that the comet has a teardrop-shaped cocoon of dust coming off its solid, icy nucleus. Image: NASA, ESA, David Jewitt (UCLA); Image Processing: Joseph DePasquale (STScI) see all nasa's 3I/atlas images Comet 3I/ATLAS Image Gallery Go to Gallery This animation shows the observations of comet 3I/ATLAS when it was discovered on July 1, 2025. The NASA-funded ATLAS survey telescope in Chile first reported that the comet originated from interstellar space. Credit: ATLAS/University of Hawaii/NASA Follow Comet 3I/ATLAS's Journey With NASA's Eyes on the Solar System interactive app, you can follow comet 3I/ATLAS as it traveled through our solar system and see where it's headed next. Unable to render the provided source First Sighting This image shows the observation of comet 3I/ATLAS when it was discovered on July 1, 2025. The NASA-funded ATLAS survey telescope in Chile first reported that the comet originated from interstellar space. ATLAS/University of Hawaii/NASA Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Asteroids, Comets & Meteors Our Solar System Planetary Defense at NASA Kuiper Belt

Explore This Section Planetary Science Stories NASA-Funded Research Finds Complex Life Defying Record Heat 6 min read Lee esta historia en español aquí. NASA-supported scientists have discovered an organism that lives at extreme temperatures previously thought impossible for complex life. High temperatures can cause the destruction of necessary cell components, which is a big problem for cells… Article NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars 5 min read When NASA’s Perseverance rover reached the inner edge of Mars’ Jezero Crater in September 2023, mission scientists were surprised by what they found. Called the “Margin Unit,” the geologic area stretches along the shoreline of an ancient Martian lake, so… Article NASA’s Moon Orbiter Spots New, ‘Once-in-Century’ Moon Crater 6 min read It started as a routine data-quality check. But as Robert Wagner, a scientist with NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), scanned a giant Moon map on his computer screen, an unusually large bright spot circled by a dark halo caught his… Article Celebrate International Observe the Moon Night with NASA 3 min read In April, the world watched as four humans circled the Moon for the first time in over 50 years with NASA’s Artemis II mission. On Saturday, Sept. 19, the public is invited to look up again with NASA events across… Article NASA’s Hubble, Webb Find Far-out Solar System Objects ‘Remember’ Past 5 min read For the first time, scientists used the joint power of NASA’s Hubble and James Webb Space Telescopes to study some of the most far-flung bodies in our solar system, Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs). Some of these are the smallest and faintest… Article Human-Related Microbes May Survive Moon’s South Pole, NASA Finds 5 min read Lee esta historia en español aquí. Some of Earth’s microbes likely to hitch a ride to space with human explorers could survive in the shaded nooks and crannies of the Moon’s South Pole region, NASA scientists say. Published on Aug.… Article NASA’s LRO Images Falcon 9 Crater on Moon, Learns New Details 3 min read Between Aug. 11 and 12, NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) captured a series of images of a new crater on the Moon. The crater formed on Aug. 5, when a SpaceX Falcon 9 upper stage impacted the surface following its… Article Next Generation of Planetary Scientists Learn Public Engagement Skills 3 min read FORCE is a world-class laboratory that uses high-pressure experimental equipment to recreate the extreme conditions found deep within Earth and other planetary bodies, enabling researchers to better understand how planets form, evolve, and behave under immense pressures. Article NASA Completes Astronaut-Deployed Science Instrument for Lunar Surface 5 min read NASA has declared “wrenches down” on the first completed payload designed for Artemis astronauts to deploy on the Moon’s surface. Engineers working on NASA’s Lunar Environment Monitoring Station, or LEMS, have completed hardware development and testing and the payload is… Article NASA’s Perseverance Rover Watches Earth Vanish Behind Martian Moon 3 min read Earth and the Martian moon Phobos dance together in a series of images recently acquired by NASA’s Perseverance Mars rover. Earth appears as a point of light in the Martian sky, disappearing behind the crescent of Phobos, the larger of… Article NASA’s Juno Takes Temperature of Jupiter’s Fiery Moon Io 5 min read Lee esta historia en español aquí. NASA’s Juno mission has provided the first measurements of the temperature below the surface of Jupiter’s moon Io, revealing significant heating within the shallow subsurface of the most volcanically active world in the solar system.… Article NASA Study Finds Near-Earth Asteroid Is Actually Comet 5 min read New research led by scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Southern California has revealed the identity of a puzzling near-Earth object by precisely tracking its motion through space and using powerful observatories that image faint celestial objects. This object… Article NASA’s Perseverance Rover Reads Record of Ancient Mars Impacts 5 min read NASA’s Perseverance Mars rover has uncovered evidence that a 245-foot-thick (75-meter-thick) stack of ancient rock on the rim of Jezero Crater was built by repeated asteroid impacts. Referred to as the “Broom Point member” by the rover’s science team, this… Article NASA Awards Contracts for Mars Advanced Surface Mobility Technology 1 min read July 8, 2026 C.13 NASA Awards Contracts for Mars Advanced Surface Mobility Technology NASA has selected seven companies for contract awards under the Mars Exploration Program’s Science Transport and Robotic Innovation for Deployment and Exploration, or STRIDE, initiative to advance… Article NASA’s New Horizons Spacecraft Wakes from Hibernation in Good Health 3 min read Following its longest hibernation period ever of nearly a year, NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft has emerged in good health and is ready to begin transmitting science data gathered in the distant Kuiper Belt far beyond Pluto. On June 23, flight… Article NASA’s Webb Studies How Planet Survived Death of its Star 6 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope is giving us new insight into the far-future of solar systems like our own, as the agency continues to reveal the secrets of the universe and our place in it. Billions of years ago, a… Article NASA’s TESS Mission Reveals the “Puffiest” Planets Ever Found 3 min read NASA has revealed two new “super-puff” planets, giant worlds so light that their density is comparable to cotton candy. Scientists calculate that these Jupiter-sized planets are the “puffiest” worlds ever found. Article NASA’s Webb Finds Clues to Ancient, Distant Origin of Comet 3I/ATLAS 4 min read As interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS began moving away from the Sun in December 2025, astronomers took the opportunity to turn NASA’s powerful James Webb Space Telescope in its direction and capture detailed measurements of its chemical components. The comet was freshly… Article NASA’s Lucy Reveals Wobbling, Peanut-Shaped Asteroid 6 min read Even small asteroids lead complex lives. During its flyby of the asteroid Donaldjohanson last year, NASA’s Lucy spacecraft revealed the asteroid to be a wobbly, peanut-shaped body that has undergone a lot of activity in its relatively short history. Article NASA Finds New Way Earth May Have Received Elements Needed for Life 4 min read NASA-supported scientists have provided new information about how the early Earth may have acquired some elements necessary for the planet to become habitable. They also suggest a new role for Jupiter in the distribution of these elements throughout the young… Article

Explore This Section You Can Do Planetary Science NASA planetary citizen science projects, open to anyone around the world, encourage volunteers to join research projects exploring the origins and composition of our solar system. Learn more below about how to participate in or start a project. Volunteers Contribute to Science Citizen Science Volunteer individuals or organizations from anywhere and with any amount of scientific background help complete NASA planetary research in myriad ways, including building radio telescopes, writing software, creating mission-based artwork, translating project materials into other languages, engaging in research at observatories, and writing (and winning) telescope use proposals. Join a Planetary Science Project Publications Resources for Researchers Citizen Science Stories For More Information Join a Planetary Science Project Amateur astronomers and volunteer (citizen) scientists discovered most of the known planets and comets, and they continue to make major contributions to planetary science research. Anyone around the world can join NASA’s planetary science efforts as an amateur/citizen scientist by participating in one of the projects below. Active Asteroids Help to find new asteroids with comet tails in the search for water and ice in space. Learn More Backyard Worlds: Planet 9 Is there a large planet beyond Neptune? Help search for it, using data from NASA's WISE mission. Learn More Cloudspotting on Mars Assist researchers in reviewing 15 years of cloud observations on Mars to confirm and classify images. Learn More Cloudspotting on Mars: Shapes Map cloud formations in images of the Martian atmosphere. For anyone with a smartphone or laptop. Learn More Daily Minor Planet Using data from the Catalina Sky Survey, look for asteroids and help spot potential Earth impactors. Learn More International Astronomical Search Collaboration Use astronomical data to make discoveries, including the search for asteroids. This program includes resources for formal curricula. Learn More JunoCam Amateur astronomers upload telescope images and data of Jupiter, which help inform NASA’s Juno mission. Learn More Lunar Melt Help map the Moon’s molten flows using images from NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter spacecraft . Learn More Radio JOVE Build your own radio telescope and tune in to signals from Jupiter. Learn More Sungrazer Project Discover previously unknown comets using data from NASA’s SOHO and STEREO missions. Learn More Planetary Science Publications Incorporating Citizen Science Shared Discoveries Volunteers worldwide engaged in NASA citizen science projects may contribute planetary discoveries that enable them to become co-authors on published papers. See papers utilizing planetary citizen science An example of citizen science annotated data from the Cloudspotting on Mars project. For Researchers Information to help researchers launch a citizen science project NASA Resources NASA's Science Mission Directorate has collected myriad citizen science resources online for project leaders. Seed Funding Resources linked here assist researchers who want to propose citizen science projects, including 1-year seed funding opportunities. NASA CitSci Leaders Series This NASA site is a hub of virtual events for current, past, and future citizen science program leaders to share best practices for successful projects. Partnership Opportunities The Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research Program (EPSCoR) establishes partnerships to strengthen the research capability of jurisdictions that have not in the past participated equably in competitive aerospace research activities. Resources for Federal Agencies This U.S. government web site provides resources to accelerate the use of crowdsourcing and citizen science with searchable project database, community connections, and toolkits. Citizen Science Stories Read More Article 2 Min Read For Your Processing Pleasure: The Sharpest Pictures of Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon Io in a Generation Article 2 Min Read New Patterns in Mars’s Clouds Revealed by Volunteers Article 2 Min Read Daily Minor Planet Volunteers Spot an Asteroid Passing Close to Earth Article 1 Min Read Radio JOVE 2023 Solar Eclipse Observations for more information Amanda Nahm Program Scientist, Lead Citizen Science Program Officer, NASA PSD Nick Lang Program Scientist, Citizen Science Program Officer, NASA PSD Marc Kuchner NASA SMD Citizen Science Officer NASA Citizen Science Learn more about all of the citizen science projects across NASA. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Planetary Science NASA’s planetary science program explores the objects in our solar system to better understand its history and the distribution of… Solar System: Exploration Earth’s Moon The Moon makes Earth more livable, sets the rhythm of ocean tides, and keeps a record of our solar system's… Planetary Science Stories

Explore This Section How does the universe work? Understanding the Forces That Shape the Cosmos The universe is vast, dynamic, and filled with mysteries still waiting to be uncovered. Since the early 20th century, scientists have known that the universe is expanding—but in the 1990s, they made a remarkable discovery: the expansion is accelerating. This surprising result revealed the influence of dark energy, a force that now appears to make up nearly 70% of the universe and drives its continued acceleration. At the same time, observations show that galaxies contain far more mass than can be accounted for by visible matter alone. This invisible substance—known as dark matter—makes up roughly 25% of the universe and acts as the framework on which galaxies and galaxy clusters form. Together, dark energy and dark matter dominate the cosmos, shaping its structure and evolution. The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope , launching in fall 2026, will investigate these unseen forces with unprecedented depth and precision—shedding new light on the nature of dark energy, dark matter, and the large-scale structure of the universe. NASA also collaborates with international missions such as ESA’s Euclid , combining global expertise to advance our understanding of the hidden universe. Through these efforts, NASA’s Astrophysics Division continues to explore the fundamental forces that shape everything we see—helping humanity understand not only how the universe works, but why it continues to evolve in such extraordinary ways. Featured Story New Simulated Universe Previews Panoramas From NASA’s Roman Telescope Astronomers have released a set of more than a million simulated images showcasing the cosmos as NASA’s upcoming Nancy Grace… Read the Story Featured Mission Roman Space Telescope The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics. Learn More Roman Beauty pass still image Featured News Article 6 Min Read How NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Illuminate Cosmic Dawn Article 6 Min Read Team Preps to Study Dark Energy via Exploding Stars With NASA’s Roman Article 6 Min Read New Images From Euclid Mission Reveal Wide View of the Dark Universe Article 5 Min Read Snippet of Euclid Mission’s Cosmic Atlas Released by ESA Keep Exploring James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Euclid What is Dark Energy? Inside Our Accelerating, Expanding Universe

Explore This Section How did we get here? Tracing the Origins of Stars, Galaxies, and Life The story of how we came to exist begins in the first moments after the Big Bang. Over 13.5 billion years, stars, galaxies, and planets formed and evolved—building the complex universe we see today. NASA’s Astrophysics missions are uncovering this history by studying how the earliest light emerged from darkness, how galaxies assembled over time, and how the elements essential to life were forged in the hearts of stars. Using current missions like the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) and the Spectro-Photometer for the History of the Universe, Epoch of Reionization, and Ices Explorer (SPHEREx) , researchers can look all the way back to the universe’s first billion years with unprecedented clarity. These missions act as powerful time machines, revealing the birth of the first stars and galaxies and showing how their evolution over time shaped the conditions that eventually led to life. Together with the current and future missions like the ESA’ Euclid and the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, these missions will deepen our understanding of how structure and complexity emerged across the universe. Complementing these efforts, strategic missions such as the Hubble Space Telescope and the Chandra X-ray Observatory , and smaller missions such as the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope , Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory , NuSTAR , IXPE , NICER , ESA’s XMM-Newton and JAXA’s XRISM continue to unravel the phenomena of the universe and reveal the physical processes that connect the earliest galaxies to our own Milky Way—linking the distant past to the universe we see today. Together, NASA’s Astrophysics missions are helping humanity understand not only where we came from, but how the universe continues to evolve—revealing the grand narrative of creation written across the stars. Featured Story NASA’s Webb Sees Galaxy Mysteriously Clearing Fog of Early Universe Using the unique infrared sensitivity of NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope, researchers can examine ancient galaxies to probe secrets of… Read the Story Featured Mission James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the history of our Universe. Learn More Artistic composite of Webb spacecraft. Steve Sabia, NASA GSFC CI Lab Featured News Article 5 Min Read NASA Webb Explores Effect of Strong Magnetic Fields on Star Formation Article 2 Min Read Hubble Studies a Nearby Galaxy’s Star Formation 4 Min Read Discovery Alert: A Rare Glimpse of a Newborn Planet Article 5 Min Read NASA Webb Wows With Incredible Detail in Actively Forming Star System Article 5 Min Read New NASA Sonifications Listen to the Universe’s Past Article Keep Exploring James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Perseverance Rover This rover and its aerial sidekick were assigned to study the geology of Mars and seek signs of ancient microbial… Parker Solar Probe On a mission to “touch the Sun,” NASA's Parker Solar Probe became the first spacecraft to fly through the corona… Juno NASA’s Juno spacecraft entered orbit around Jupiter in 2016, the first explorer to peer below the planet's dense clouds to…

Explore This Section Are we alone? Searching for Life Beyond Earth For as long as humanity has looked to the stars, we’ve wondered whether life exists elsewhere in the universe. Until the early 1990s, no planets were known beyond our solar system. As of 2025, thanks to NASA’s astrophysics missions, scientists have confirmed more than 6,000 exoplanets—worlds orbiting other stars—with thousands more candidates awaiting confirmation. Among them, dozens are roughly Earth-sized and located in their star’s habitable zone, where conditions may allow liquid water essential to life to exist. While the first detailed census of exoplanets outside the Solar System was performed by NASA’s Kepler mission and some of the first observations of exoplanet atmospheres were obtained with Hubble , NASA’s search for life beyond Earth is accelerating through a new generation of missions. The James Webb Space Telescope is studying with unprecedented detail the atmospheres of distant exoplanets, searching for the chemical fingerprints of habitability. The Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) continues to identify new planet candidates orbiting nearby stars, while the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope , launching in fall 2026, will expand this search to unprecedented scales—discovering thousands of new worlds. Roman will also demonstrate advanced coronagraph technology that will capture direct images of several planets around nearby stars. This is a crucial step toward the development of an instrument that will one day allow NASA to directly image Earth-like planets around Sun-like stars. Building on that foundation, NASA is developing the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO) —the next great flagship mission in astrophysics. HWO will use evolved versions of Roman’s coronagraph and other cutting-edge technologies to detect and study Earth-like planets and analyze their atmospheres for signs of life. Together, these missions bring us closer than ever to answering one of humanity’s most profound questions: Are we alone in the universe? Featured Story NASA’s Webb Images Young, Giant Exoplanets, Detects Carbon Dioxide NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has captured direct images of multiple gas giant planets within an iconic planetary system. HR… Read the Story Featured Mission Habitable Worlds Observatory The Habitable Worlds Observatory is a large infrared/optical/ultraviolet space telescope recommended by the National Academies’ Pathways to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 2020s. Learn More Artist's Impression of Exoplanet K2-18b ESA/Hubble, M. Kornmesser Featured News Article 4 Min Read Discovery Alert: ‘Super-Earth’ Swings from Super-Heated to Super-Chill Article 8 Min Read Other Skies, Other Suns: the Search for Exoplanet Atmospheres 3 Min Read NASA Awards Advance Technologies for Future Habitable Worlds Mission News Release 6 Min Read NASA’s Webb Exposes Complex Atmosphere of Starless Super-Jupiter Article 5 Min Read NASA Scientists Spot Candidate for Speediest Exoplanet System Article Keep Exploring James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. TESS (Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite) NASA’s TESS discovers exoplanets, worlds beyond our solar system. In the course of its extended observations of the sky, TESS… Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics.

Physics of the Cosmos Physics of the Cosmos The Physics of the Cosmos (PhysCOS) Program seeks to answer some of the deepest questions about the universe. How do matter and energy behave in the most extreme corners of the cosmos — near black holes, neutron stars, and the first moments after the Big Bang? What forces set the universe in motion and continue to shape its growth? What are the hidden ingredients — dark matter and dark energy — that make up most of the universe but remain invisible to us? PhysCOS seeks to uncover these mysteries, helping us better understand the cosmos and our place within it. Goals Community Studies Missions Answering the hard questions How does the universe work? PhysCOS brings together physics and astronomy to explore some of the biggest mysteries of the universe. It looks at Einstein’s theory of gravity, what spacetime really is, how matter and energy behave in the most extreme places in the cosmos, what shaped the early universe and drives its growth, and what dark matter and dark energy are made of. Learn More Illustration: NASA, ESA, CSA, Ralf Crawford (STScI) Our Community Exploring the nature of complex astrophysical phenomena. The Physics of the Cosmos Program Analysis Group serves as a community-based, interdisciplinary forum for soliciting and coordinating community analysis and input in support of Physics of the Cosmos objectives and of their implications for architecture planning and activity prioritization and for future exploration. Learn More ESA/Hubble & NASA, F. Belfiore, J. Lee and the PHANGS-HST Team Why We Study Studies refine mission designs, assess technical readiness, and identify potential risks. Ensuring that only the most scientifically valuable, technically feasible, and cost-effective missions advance toward full development and eventual launch. Learn More NASA, ESA, CSA, and STScI Missions Searching for answers about our universe and how it works. No one mission or observatory can provide all the answers. The Physics of the Cosmos Program includes telescopes that operate across much of the electromagnetic spectrum. From the Chandra Space Telescope’s groundbreaking science to the future discoveries awaiting us with the Roman Space Telescope, Physics of the Cosmos facilities help us in our search for answers to the biggest questions about our universe and how it works. Learn More NASA Physics of the cosmos Community Science The ASTRA Initiative The Astrophysics Strategic Technology & Research Accelerator (ASTRA) Initiative will streamline future strategic missions by lowering overall costs, shortening the time required to achieve scientific results, and minimizing schedule risks. Learn More Combining data from NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory with radio observations and computer simulations, an international team of scientists has discovered a vast wave of hot gas in the nearby Perseus galaxy cluster. Spanning some 200,000 light-years, the wave is about twice the size of our own Milky Way galaxy. Researchers say the wave formed billions of years ago, after a small galaxy cluster grazed Perseus and caused its vast supply of gas to slosh around an enormous volume of space. Galaxy clusters are the largest structures bound by gravity in the universe today. Some 11 million light-years across and located about 240 million light-years away, the Perseus galaxy cluster is named for its host constellation. Like all galaxy clusters, most of its observable matter takes the form of a pervasive gas averaging tens of millions of degrees, so hot it only glows in X-rays. Credit: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Stephen Walker et al. Latest News & Events FLAG SAG Meeting, 2 Oct 2026 FLAG SAG Meeting to Discuss the Draft FLAG SAG Report. 12:00pm - 1:00pm ET CMB SAG Meeting, 25 Sept 2026 Discussion of a White Paper in Support of a CMB Space Probe. 1:00pm ET / 10:00am PT PhysPAG Community Meeting, 28 Sept 2026 Join us for a PhysPAG Town Hall to discuss the results of the Ad ASTRA workshop. 12:00pm ET / 9:00am PT TDAMM SIG Seminar, 22 Oct 2026 The UltraViolet EXplorer (UVEX). Speakers: Dan Weisz (UCB) and Suvi Gezari (UMD) PhysCOS: Virtual Panel on Responsible Use of AI/ML in Research Now As part of our third Early Career Workshop, we are hosting a panel on the Responsible Use of AI/ML in… Third Early Career Workshop, Sept 2026 Physics of the Cosmos Third Early Career Workshop. 22-24 September 2026 How does the Universe work? Artistic Vision of the Complex Physics of the Cosmos The Physics of the Cosmos theme is focused on understanding, "How does the universe work?" The elements of the image on this poster are intended artistically to evoke the great questions embedded in that simple query. Download Poster PDF How does the Universe work? Artistic Vision of the Complex Physics of the Cosmos Featured Videos XRISM (X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission) Watch this video to learn more about XRISM (X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission), a collaboration between JAXA (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency) and NASA. Watch on YouTube A Black Hole's Magnetic Reversal A rare and enigmatic outburst from a galaxy 236 million light-years away may have been sparked by a magnetic reversal, a spontaneous flip of the magnetic field surrounding its central black hole. Watch on YouTube Black Hole Snack Attack Using NASA’s Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory, which launched in 2004, scientists have discovered a black hole in a distant galaxy repeatedly nibbling on a Sun-like star. Watch on YouTube LISA Pathfinder’s Stunning Success LISA Pathfinder was launched on Dec. 3, 2015, and began orbiting a point called Earth-sun L1, roughly 930,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth in the sun's direction, in late January 2016. Watch on YouTube Eye on Infinity: NASA Celebrates Hubble’s 35th Year in Orbit After more than three decades of perusing the universe, Hubble remains a household name — the most well-recognized and scientifically productive telescope in history. The Hubble mission is a glowing success story of America’s technological prowess, unyielding scientific curiosity, and a reiteration of our nation’s pioneering spirit. Read More about Eye on Infinity: NASA Celebrates Hubble’s 35th Year in Orbit Keep Exploring Discover More NASA Science Missions Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 3D Model Chandra X-ray Observatory The Chandra X-ray Observatory is the world's most powerful X-ray telescope.

Cosmic Origins Cosmic Origins How did we get here? Answering this question is the key goal of the Cosmic Origins Program and one of the overarching goals of NASA Astrophysics. Goals Community Studies Missions Answering the hard questions How did we get here? Answering this question is the key goal of the Cosmic Origins Program and one of the overarching goals of NASA Astrophysics. As a cornerstone of NASA Astrophysics, the program studies the universe from its beginning in the Big Bang, through the formation of stars and galaxies, to the creation of the elements forged within those stars. By tracing how these elements gave rise to planets and, ultimately, to life, Cosmic Origins connects the story of the cosmos to our own existence. Learn More NASA, ESA, Joel Kastner (RIT) Our Community Exploring the origin and evolution of the galaxies, stars and planets that make up our universe. The Cosmos Origins Program Analysis Group serves as a community-based, interdisciplinary forum for soliciting and coordinating community analysis and input in support of Cosmic Origin objectives and of their implications for architecture planning and activity prioritization and for future exploration. Learn More NASA Why We Study Studies refine mission designs, assess technical readiness, and identify potential risks. Ensuring that only the most scientifically valuable, technically feasible, and cost-effective missions advance toward full development and eventual launch. Learn More NASA Missions Searching for answers about our universe and its origins. No one mission or observatory can provide all the answers. The Cosmic Origins Program includes telescopes that together operate across much of the electromagnetic spectrum. From the iconic Hubble Space Telescope’s groundbreaking science to the future discoveries awaiting us with the James Webb Space Telescope and more to come, Cosmic Origin's facilities help us in our search for answers to the biggest questions about our universe and its origins. Learn More NASA Cosmic Origins Community Science The ASTRA Initiative The Astrophysics Strategic Technology & Research Accelerator (ASTRA) Initiative will streamline future strategic missions by lowering overall costs, shortening the time required to achieve scientific results, and minimizing schedule risks. Learn More NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s 2024 NIRCam image shows protostar EC 53 circled. Researchers using new data from Webb’s MIRI proved that crystalline silicates form in the hottest part of the disk of gas and dust surrounding the star — and may be shot to the system’s edges. Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI, Klaus Pontoppidan (NASA-JPL), Joel Green (STScI); Image Processing: Alyssa Pagan (STScI) Latest News & Events Galaxies SIG Seminar, 6 Oct 2026 A Galaxy Doesn’t Forget: Why You Should Trust Your Resolved SFHs from Photometric Observations. Speaker: Charlotte Olsen (CUNY City Tech) IR STIG PRIMA Seminar, 28 Sept 2026 Time Domain in the Thermal Infrared: NEOWISE, NEO Surveyor, and the Hunt for Hazardous Asteroids. Speaker: Joseph Masiero (California Institute… AI/ML STIG Lecture Series, 28 Sept 2026 AI/ML STIG Lecture Series Cosmic Origins Second Early Career Workshop, Oct 2026 Cosmic Origins Second Early Career Workshop. 20-22 October 2026 TDAMM SIG Seminar, 22 October 2026 The UltraViolet EXplorer (UVEX). Speakers: Dan Weisz (UCB) and Suvi Gezari (UMD) DGCE SIG Seminar, 24 Sept 2026 How the Faint Radio Sky is Changing Our Understanding of Star Formation and Galactic Outflows. Speaker: Allison Matthews Featured Story NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Launches NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope lifted off at 7:26 a.m. EDT aboard a SpaceX Falcon Heavy from Launch Complex… Read the Story Latest Podcast Small Steps, Giant Leaps: Episode 139: NASA's Cosmic Origins Program NASA’s Cosmic Origins Program seeks to understand the origins of the universe, including the formation and evolution of galaxies, stars, and planets. In this episode, Dr. Swara Ravindranath, deputy chief scientist, and Dr. Ron Gamble, a theoretical astrophysicist, discuss their research and the program's goals. They also highlight the importance of diverse perspectives and experiences. Learn More about Latest Podcast Featured Videos XRISM Exploring the Hidden X-ray Cosmos Watch this video to learn more about XRISM (X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission), a collaboration between JAXA (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency) and NASA. Watch on YouTube Expansion Rate: The Hubble Tension In this video, Nobel Laureate Dr. Adam Riess explains this phenomenon known as “Hubble Tension,” and how important this mystery is to our understanding of the universe. Watch on YouTube Mystery of Galaxy’s Missing Dark Matter Deepens Finding a galaxy lacking the invisible stuff is an extraordinary claim that challenges conventional wisdom. It would have the potential to upset theories of galaxy formation and evolution. Watch on YouTube A New Portrait of the Cosmos is Coming The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, formerly known as WFIRST, is an upcoming space telescope designed to perform wide-field imaging and spectroscopy of the infrared sky. Watch on YouTube News Straight to Your Inbox Subscribe to your community email news list We will never share your email address. Privacy Policy Sign Up Keep Exploring Discover More NASA Science Missions Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 3D Model Chandra X-ray Observatory The Chandra X-ray Observatory is the world's most powerful X-ray telescope.

ExEP Exoplanet Exploration Program NASA's search for habitable planets and life beyond our solar system Overview The Exoplanet Exploration Program (ExEP) is responsible for implementing NASA’s plans for the discovery and understanding of planetary systems around nearby stars. ExEP serves the science community and NASA by acting as a focal point for exoplanet science and technology, and by the integration of cohesive strategies for future discoveries. The mission of the Exoplanet Exploration Program is threefold — to search for planets beyond our solar system, characterize them, and look for life on the planets. The scientists and engineers who work at NASA's exoplanet program work daily to make those goals a reality. Learn more about us on our Team page , and view foundational documents in the Documents section . Exoplanet Meetings The Exoplanet Exploration Program (ExEP) maintains a list of meetings and events that have a significant exoplanet-related component. ExoExplorers ExoExplorers aims to enable the professional development of a cohort of PhD candidates and/or postdocs in exoplanet research. Exoplanet Travel Bureau Journey beyond our solar system with guided tours, 360-degree surface visualizations, and our popular travel posters. How Do We Find Exoplanets? Exoplanets are far, but scientists have discovered some creative ways to spot these elusive objects. Target Star catalog The Search for Habitable Worlds The Target Star Catalog is a guide to intriguing nearby stars that astronomers want to study with future missions, such as the Habitable Worlds Observatory, which will be built specifically to find and observe Earth-like exoplanets, to search for signs of life. Browse the Target Star Catalog An artist's rendering of a red dwarf or M star, with three exoplanets orbiting. About 75 percent of all stars in the sky are the cooler, smaller red dwarfs. NASA/JPL-Caltech otherworldly Encyclopedia Exoplanet Catalog Learn more about every confirmed exoplanet — 6,000+ and counting — in this continuously updated resource. View interactive 3D models, read descriptions and vital statistics, and filter by exoplanet type, or by the method used to discover it, or by the spacecraft, observatory, or other facility that found it. Browse the Exoplanet Catalog Screenshot of the Eyes on Exoplanets interactive showing an orange gas giant planet KELT-4 A b. NASA Exoplanet Types So far scientists have categorized exoplanets into the following types: Gas giant, Neptunian, super-Earth, and terrestrial, with subcategories — such as mini-Neptunes — within those groups. How are they alike or different? What makes them special? Learn More about Exoplanet Types Managed by the Exoplanet Exploration Program and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA’s Astrophysics Division Facebook logo @NASAUniverse @NASAUniverse Instagram logo @nasauniverse Linkedin logo @NASA Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Search for Life Stars Galaxies Black Holes

Explore This Section Astrophysics Explorers The mission of the Explorers Program is to provide frequent flight opportunities for world-class scientific investigations from space utilizing innovative, streamlined and efficient management approaches within the heliophysics and astrophysics science areas. Explorers are opportunities for innovative science and fill the scientific gaps between the larger missions. The program seeks to enhance public awareness of, and appreciation for, space science and to incorporate educational and public outreach activities as integral parts of space science investigations. The Explorer program enables the definition, development and implementation of mission concepts through a variety of modes to meet the need of the scientific community and the NASA space science enterprise. The Explorer Program Office at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, MD, provides management of the multiple scientific exploration missions in the Explorer space flight program. The missions are characterized by relatively moderate cost, and by small to medium sized missions that are capable of being built, tested and launched in a short time interval compared to the large observatories. Astrophysics Missions Small- and medium-class, PI-led Astrophysics missions, as well as Astrophysics missions of opportunity, are selected under the Astrophysics Explorers program, and are managed by the Astrophysics Division. Explorers are opportunities for focused scientific investigations, and fill the scientific gaps between the larger missions. For example, the Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array (NuSTAR) is conducting a census of black holes for the Physics of the Cosmos program and studying the birth of elements for the Cosmic Origins program . The Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS ) is now in operations identifying terrestrial planets in the habitable zones of nearby stars. The Neutron Star Interior Composition Explorer (NICER) mission of opportunity has been mounted on the space station and is measuring the variability of cosmic X-ray sources to explore the exotic states of matter within neutron stars and reveal their interior and surface compositions. The Imaging X-Ray Polarimetry Explore (IXPE) use the polarization state of light from astrophysical sources to provide insight into our understanding of X-ray production in objects such as neutron stars and pulsar wind nebulae, as well as stellar and supermassive black holes. GUSTO (Galactic/extragalactic Ultra long duration balloon Spectroscopic Terahertz Observatory) will untangle the complexities of the interstellar medium and map out large sections of the plane of our Milky Way galaxy and the nearby galaxy known as the Large Magellanic Cloud. Finally, XRISM (X-Ray Imaging and Spectroscopy) is a JAXA/NASA collaborative mission with ESA participation investigates X-ray celestial objects in the Universe with high-throughput, high-resolution spectroscopy. Featured Story How Many Black Holes Are Hiding? NASA Study Homes in on Answer An effort to find some of the biggest, most active black holes in the universe provides a better estimate for… Read the Story Featured News Article 4 Min Read NASA’s NuSTAR Telescope Reveals Hidden Light Shows on the Sun Article 6 Min Read NASA’s TESS Spots Record-Breaking Stellar Triplets Article 4 Min Read GUSTO Breaks NASA Scientific Balloon Record for Days in Flight Article 4 Min Read NASA, JAXA XRISM Mission Looks Deeply Into ‘Hidden’ Stellar System Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA NuSTAR TESS (Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite) NASA’s TESS discovers exoplanets, worlds beyond our solar system. In the course of its extended observations of the sky, TESS… XRISM NICER

Explore This Section Astrophysics Research Sponsored research programs prepare for the next generation of missions through both theoretical research and applied technology investigations. They also use data from current missions and use suborbital science investigations to advance NASA science goals. Suborbital missions are an integral part of the R&A program, including sounding rocket and balloon campaigns which provide ancillary measurements, demonstrate measurement technologies, and train future mission PIs and students. Current status of the Astrophysics research competitions: R&A 2017.12.07 Sponsored fellowships are also an important part of the Astrophysics Research program. There are two fellowship programs: Hubble Fellowship Program (includes Hubble Fellows, Einstein Fellows and Sagan Fellows) Roman Technology Fellowship Program Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Perseverance Rover This rover and its aerial sidekick were assigned to study the geology of Mars and seek signs of ancient microbial… Parker Solar Probe On a mission to “touch the Sun,” NASA's Parker Solar Probe became the first spacecraft to fly through the corona… Juno NASA’s Juno spacecraft entered orbit around Jupiter in 2016, the first explorer to peer below the planet's dense clouds to…

Explore This Section Astrophysics Programs Physics of the Cosmos Cosmic Origins Exoplanet Exploration Astrophysics Explorers Astrophysics Research Habitable Worlds Observatory Astrophysics Strategic Missions Program Mission Operations NASA’s Astrophysics Division established three focused programs that provide an intellectual framework for advancing science and strategic planning: Physics of the Cosmos (PhysCOS), Cosmic Origins (COR), and Exoplanet Exploration (ExEP). Each program primarily addresses one of the three most fundamental questions related to astrophysics: “How did we get here?” (COR), “How does the universe work?” (PhysCOS), and “Are we alone?” (ExEP). Two cross-cutting programs complement these focused programs: the Astrophysics Explorers Program, which develops and operates smaller, principal investigator (PI)-led missions, and the Astrophysics Research Program, which supports basic and applied research activities that include suborbital flight investigations as well as the development and maturation of technologies for future strategic and competed missions. Physics of the Cosmos The Physics of the Cosmos (PhysCOS) Program lies at the intersection of physics and astronomy. Its purpose is to explore some of the most fundamental questions regarding the physical forces and laws of the universe: the validity of Einstein's General Theory of Relativity and the nature of spacetime, the behavior of matter and energy in extreme environments, the cosmological parameters governing inflation and the evolution of the universe, and the nature of dark matter and dark energy. Cosmic Origins The Cosmic Origins Program covers a broad range of topics that are fundamental to our understanding of the evolution of structure in the universe and the physical processes that can explain the formation of galaxies, stars, and planets that we observe today. The Cosmic Origins Program includes telescopes that operate together across much of the electromagnetic spectrum. From the iconic Hubble Space Telescope’s groundbreaking science to the new discoveries with the James Webb Space Telescope and more to come, Cosmic Origins’ facilities help us in our search for answers to the biggest questions about our universe and its origins. Exoplanet Exploration The Exoplanet Exploration Program (ExEP) is responsible for implementing NASA’s plans for the discovery and understanding of planetary systems around nearby stars to characterize the diversity of other worlds and search for solar systems like ours. These investigations and the missions that carry them out are designed to build on each other's success, each providing an essential step forward toward the goal of discovering habitable planets and providing definitive evidence of life beyond our solar system. ExEP serves the science community and NASA by acting as a focal point for exoplanet science and technology, and by the integration of cohesive strategies for future discoveries. Astrophysics Explorers Small- and medium-class, PI-led Astrophysics missions, as well as Astrophysics missions of opportunity, are selected under the Astrophysics Explorers Program, and are managed by the Astrophysics Division. Explorers are opportunities for focused scientific investigations and fill the scientific gaps between the larger missions. Astrophysics Research NASA Balloon Program : Large unmanned helium balloons provide NASA with an inexpensive means to place payloads into a space environment. The unique capabilities of this program are crucial for the development of new technologies and payloads for NASA's space flight missions. Many important scientific observations in fields such as hard x-ray/gamma-ray and infrared astronomy, cosmic rays, and atmospheric studies have been made from balloons. The newly developed capability is focused on thin-film high altitude balloons for higher altitude flights and super pressure balloons for long duration flights, which has greatly expanded the opportunities for scientific studies from balloons. NASA Sounding Rockets (managed by Heliophysics Division): Sounding rockets carry scientific instruments into space along parabolic trajectories, providing nearly vertical traversals along their upleg and downleg, while appearing to "hover" near their apogee location. Whereas the overall time in space is brief (typically 5-20 minutes), for a well-placed scientific experiment launched into a geophysical phenomenon of interest, the short time and low vehicle speeds are more than adequate (in some cases they are ideal) to carry out a successful scientific experiment. Furthermore, there are some important regions of space that are too low to be sampled by satellites (i.e., the lower ionosphere/thermosphere and mesosphere below 120 km altitude) and thus sounding rockets provide the only platforms that can carry out direct in-situ measurements in these regions. Pioneers Program: Established in 2020, the Pioneers Program enables compelling and cost-effective astrophysics science using smaller hardware than missions in the Explorers Program, including SmallSats, major Balloon payloads, and modest payloads attached to the International Space Station with a $20 million cost cap. Astrophysics Division Technology : The science missions of the Astrophysics Division are enabled by technologies developed through the Division’s technology development programs aimed at supporting early phase mission development. The Division receives periodic input from various advisory groups and the Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey to plan future science missions and identify the necessary technology development to enable those missions. Astrophysics Strategic Missions Program The Astrophysics Strategic Missions Program (ASMP) consists of large, strategic missions that seek to advance high-priority science objectives set forth by the astrophysics science community to understand how the universe works, explore how it began and evolved, and search for life on planets around other stars. ASMP is implementing the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, a mandate from the 2010 Decadal Survey in Astronomy and Astrophysics. After Roman, the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO), the top priority of the 2020 Decadal Survey in Astronomy and Astrophysics, will be NASA’s next flagship space telescope optimized to search for Earth-like planets. Habitable Worlds Observatory The Habitable Worlds Observatory is a large infrared/optical/ultraviolet space telescope recommended by the National Academies’ Pathways to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 2020s. It would be the first telescope designed specifically to search for signs of life on planets orbiting other stars. NASA is further prioritizing its long-running search for life in the universe and laying the groundwork for its next flagship astrophysics mission after the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope (slated to launch by May 2027). This observatory would simultaneously provide powerful capabilities for transformational astrophysics discoveries, from our cosmic backyard of the solar system to the distant universe and everything in between. Mission Operations Space Science Mission Operations The Space Science Mission Operations (SSMO) Project at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, MD manages operations for heliophysics, astrophysics, and planetary science missions. SSMO is also involved in mission concept development, ground system development, integration and testing, and operations readiness preparations. Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. The Hubble Space Telescope Operations Project at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, MD, oversees the health, safety, and performance of the telescope. It monitors and commands the spacecraft, responds to problems, develops flight software, upgrades hardware and software, and maintains the network and ground systems. James Webb Space Telescope Mission Operations The James Webb Space Telescope is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide since its launch in December 2021. The Webb Mission Operations Center at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, MD, commands and controls the telescope, develops and releases software, and responds if the telescope experiences an anomaly. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Perseverance Rover This rover and its aerial sidekick were assigned to study the geology of Mars and seek signs of ancient microbial… Parker Solar Probe On a mission to “touch the Sun,” NASA's Parker Solar Probe became the first spacecraft to fly through the corona… Juno NASA’s Juno spacecraft entered orbit around Jupiter in 2016, the first explorer to peer below the planet's dense clouds to…

NuSTAR Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array Active Mission What Black-Hole Spin Pushes Gravity's Limits Solved How Do Supernovae Occur? Achievements A Decade of Discoveries Studying the universe in high-energy X-rays to better understand the dynamics of black holes, exploding stars, and the most extreme active galaxies, this telescope was first to measure precisely the spin of a black hole, and contributed to the first-ever picture of a black hole. Type Space Telescope Launch June 13, 2012 Target Universe Objective Map Selected Regions of the Sky NuSTAR Mission Poster Celebrate 13 years in orbit with NuSTAR Learn More about NuSTAR Mission Poster Downloads View All NuSTAR Art + Coloring Pages Jun 12, 2025 PDF (2.56 MB) Learn more about NuSTAR NuSTAR Stories Explore All NuSTAR (Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array) Stories Article 11 Min Read Black Hole Eats Star: NASA Missions Discover Record-Setting Blast Article 6 Min Read How Many Black Holes Are Hiding? NASA Study Homes in on Answer 5 Min Read Astronomers Catch Unprecedented Features at Brink of Active Black Hole Article 2 Min Read A Magnetar Loses Mass (Artist’s Concept) Article 6 Min Read NASA Telescopes Find New Clues About Mysterious Deep Space Signals Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Perseverance Rover This rover and its aerial sidekick were assigned to study the geology of Mars and seek signs of ancient microbial… Parker Solar Probe On a mission to “touch the Sun,” NASA's Parker Solar Probe became the first spacecraft to fly through the corona… Juno NASA’s Juno spacecraft entered orbit around Jupiter in 2016, the first explorer to peer below the planet's dense clouds to…

Explore This Section 2020 Decadal Survey A new decadal survey from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine identifies scientific priorities, opportunities, and funding recommendations for the next 10 years of astronomy and astrophysics. Pathways to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 2020s drew from the astronomical community through hundreds of white papers, town hall meetings, and the advice of 13 sub-panels over several years to produce its recommendations. The study — undertaken by the Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020 (Astro2020) Steering Committee — was sponsored by NASA, National Science Foundation, U.S. Department of Energy, and U.S. Air Force. The report presents a visionary plan for the field to pursue discovery and exploration of habitable planets, enhance understanding of the dynamic and changing universe, and study what drives the formation of galaxies. It recommends an ambitious program of investments to strengthen the profession, change how large strategic space missions are developed and matured, and achieve broad scientific capabilities. The report emphasizes the importance of balancing investments in research, and recommends strengthening investments in the foundations of astronomy and astrophysics as well as in its workforce. The report identifies three priority scientific areas that motivate recommended investments over the next decade: Pathways to habitable worlds – Identify and characterize Earth-like planets outside this solar system, with the ultimate goal of obtaining imaging of potentially habitable worlds. New windows on the dynamic universe – Probe the nature of black holes and neutron stars — and the explosive events that gave rise to them — and understand what happened in the earliest moments in the birth of the universe. Drivers of galaxy growth – Revolutionize understanding of the origins and evolution of galaxies, from the webs of gas that feed them to the formation of stars. The report says the highest-priority sustaining activity for NASA is the space-based time-domain and multi-messenger program — comprised of small- and medium-scale missions. NASA should also pursue a new line of probe missions. A cadence of one probe mission per decade, with a cost cap of $1.5 billion, balances scientific scope with timeliness, the report says. Related Resources APD Responses to Decadal A snapshot of Astrophysics Division accomplishments and plans in response to the 2020 decadal survey “Pathways to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 2020s”. Pre 2020 Decadal Reports Review the activities of NASA's Astrophysics Division in preparation for the 2020 Decadal Survey. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Perseverance Rover This rover and its aerial sidekick were assigned to study the geology of Mars and seek signs of ancient microbial… Parker Solar Probe On a mission to “touch the Sun,” NASA's Parker Solar Probe became the first spacecraft to fly through the corona… Juno NASA’s Juno spacecraft entered orbit around Jupiter in 2016, the first explorer to peer below the planet's dense clouds to…

Explore This Section Astrophysics Stories NASA Selects Far-Infrared Telescope as First in New Mission Class 4 min read Editor’s Note: This release was updated on Sept. 24, 2026, to reflect current international partners. NASA announced Wednesday a mission to explore the history and evolution of the universe, PRIMA (PRobe far-Infrared Mission for Astrophysics), is advancing to the next… News Release NASA’s Hubble Seeks Lensed Supernova, Marks 200,000 Orbits 2 min read NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope completed its 200,000th orbit around Earth on Sept. 19, marking another new milestone for an observatory that continues to transform our understanding of the universe. Hubble has traveled more than 5 billion miles around Earth over… Article NASA-JAXA XRISM Mission Sees Pulsar Gathering Companion’s ‘Wind’ 5 min read Using data from the Japan-led XRISM (X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission) observatory, astronomers have directly observed a giant star’s outflow, called a stellar wind, being captured by its compact companion and providing the power source for strong X-ray flares. The… Article NASA’s Hubble Spots an Out-of-Sync Galaxy 3 min read Though the spiral galaxy in this new image from the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope seems serene, it hides a chaotic secret. This galaxy is NGC 4698, and it lies about 55 million light-years away in the constellation Virgo. It’s one of over a… Article NASA Awards Launch Services for StarBurst Gamma-Ray Detector 2 min read NASA has selected SpaceX to provide launch services for the agency’s StarBurst mission, a small satellite designed to investigate neutron star mergers and the origins of short gamma-ray bursts. StarBurst will launch aboard a Bandwagon rideshare mission on a Falcon… News Release NASA’s Webb Reveals Dynamic Panorama of Star Formation 5 min read This starry view of the nearby star-forming region IC 348 is one of the largest images released to date from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope. Using Webb, astronomers searched IC 348 for brown dwarfs, which are less massive than the… Article NASA’s Chandra Unveils Mysterious X-Ray Objects 5 min read Using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, scientists have discovered a new class of objects behaving unlike any they have seen before. Astronomers suggest these newly spotted objects in other galaxies may help solve not one, but two long-standing questions in astrophysics.… Article NASA’s Hubble, Webb Find Far-out Solar System Objects ‘Remember’ Past 5 min read For the first time, scientists used the joint power of NASA’s Hubble and James Webb Space Telescopes to study some of the most far-flung bodies in our solar system, Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs). Some of these are the smallest and faintest… Article NASA’s Hubble Spies Superbubble Scene 3 min read This Hubble Space Telescope image features a sprawling cosmic vista called N44. Article NASA’s Hubble Tracks New Decagon Encircling Saturn’s South Pole 5 min read NASA's Hubble Space Telescope observes a giant, evolving, 10-sided atmospheric wave encircling Saturn's south pole. Article

Explore This Section Habitable Worlds Observatory HWO is a large infrared/optical/ultraviolet space telescope recommended by the National Academies’ Pathways to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 2020s. HWO will be the first telescope designed specifically to search for signs of life on planets orbiting other stars. With a powerful set of instruments, it will also provide a platform for transformational astrophysics. Overview The Story of Life in the Universe Transformational Astrophysics Technology Community A mission that would search for and characterize habitable planets beyond our solar system. NASA is further prioritizing its long-running search for life in the universe and laying the groundwork for its next flagship astrophysics mission after the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope (slated to launch by May 2027.) Currently referred to as the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO), HWO builds upon studies conducted for two earlier mission concepts called the Large Ultraviolet Optical Infrared Surveyor (LUVOIR) and Habitable Exoplanets Observatory (HabEx.) HWO Mission History Simulated image of a Solar System analog 30 light-years away, as captured by a large Infrared/Optical/Ultraviolet space telescope. STScI, NASA GSFC A mission designed specifically to identify potentially habitable planets around other stars. The mission's main objective: identify and directly image 25 potentially habitable worlds. Gasses such as oxygen and methane could serve as critical evidence for life. HWO will use spectroscopy to search for chemical "biosignatures" in these planets' atmospheres. Read More In this artist’s concept, X-ray and extreme ultraviolet light from a young red dwarf star cause ions to escape from an exoplanet’s atmosphere. NASA Goddard/Conceptual Image Lab, Michael Lentz, animator/Genna Duberstein, producer A mission to provide powerful capabilities for transformational astrophysics discoveries. HWO will observe the cosmic backyard of our solar system, the distant universe, and everything in between. The observatory would introduce new capabilities to study the universe with unprecedented sensitivity and resolution, giving us important new insights into the evolution of cosmic structures, including how galaxies form and develop over time. Read More This image of NGC 5468, a galaxy located about 130 million light-years from Earth, combines data from the Hubble and James Webb space telescopes. This is the farthest galaxy in which Hubble has identified Cepheid variable stars. These are important milepost markers for measuring the expansion rate of the universe. NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI, Adam G. Riess (JHU, STScI) A mission that will push architectural boundaries. Engineering Architecture Concepts (EACs) are key cases that help the HWO technology maturation teams explore the trade space. EACs allow the HWO engineers to develop end-to-end modeling, from science goals to engineering parameters. The EACs will help identify technology gaps for instrument development, explore architectural options for the telescope, and provide feedback to rocket vendors. Read More EAC-1, an engineering concept of HWO. It is unlikely that this will be the telescope's final design. NASA Goddard/Conceptual Image Labs A mission guided by you. Mentorship & community-driven input are crucial to HWO's future. Key to the HWO mission is developing the outlook of the field of Astronomy by mentoring early career professionals and receiving guidance and input from academia, government, industry, and international partners. Read More A photo of the participants of the Habitable Worlds Observatory face to face meeting, which took place in Rochester, NY in October 2024. NASA/HQ/Megan Ansdell and STScI/Marc Postman Featured Video The Search for Life Is there other life in the cosmos? How will we know? One telescope will give us the answers to that and more. The Habitable Worlds Observatory: the story of life in the universe. Learn More Exploring the Trade Space HWO’s engineers perform modeling with various telescope designs to make informed decisions about trade-offs, such as choosing the best balance between telescope size, instrument sensitivity, and stability. Learn More about Exploring the Trade Space HWO news in your inbox Subscribe to the HWO mailing list We will never share your email address. Privacy Policy Sign Up Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… About Roman NASA Astrophysics

Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory The Swift Spacecraft Swift launched into orbit on Nov. 20, 2004, as NASA’s Swift Gamma-ray Observatory. In 2018, NASA renamed the spacecraft in honor of Neil Gehrels, who helped develop Swift and served as its first principal investigator. At the time of its launch, Swift was a first-of-its-kind multiwavelength observatory dedicated to the study of GRBs (gamma-ray bursts). GRBs are the most powerful explosions in the universe, triggered by the catastrophic deaths of massive stars — and the formation of new black holes within them — or the mergers of systems containing orbiting neutron stars or black holes. Swift’s three instruments work together to observe GRBs and their afterglows in gamma-ray, X-ray, ultraviolet, and visible light. An artist’s concept of the Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory in orbit with spacecraft elements identified. NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Conceptual Image Lab Swift’s BAT (Burst Alert Telescope) detects and localizes gamma-ray bursts to within a tenth of a degree (3 arcminutes or less) and then relays this position to the ground within 20 seconds. After the initial burst detection, the spacecraft autonomously — and “swiftly” (between 20 to 100 seconds) — repoints to bring the burst location into the field of view of the sensitive narrow-field XRT (X-Ray Telescope) and UVOT (Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope) to observe the explosion’s afterglow. Swift’s speed, flexibility, and broad wavelength coverage quickly led to its wider use as a general astronomical observatory, studying phenomena as diverse as exploding stars and their remnants , stellar flares , passing stars torn apart by supermassive black holes , eruptions in active galaxies , and comets and asteroids in our solar system. It also conducted an all-sky high-energy X-ray survey as well as ultraviolet surveys of nearby galaxies. By its 20th anniversary in orbit, Swift had observed 1,800 GRBs, 1,400 supernovae, and data it captured had been used in more than 6,600 scientific publications. Burst Alert Telescope The BAT’s large field of view enables it to see up to 50% of the sky at once. The BAT is a coded aperture instrument, which uses a D-shaped mask of about 52,000 tiny, randomly placed lead tiles placed a meter above the detectors. Light from a GRB or other high-energy source casts a shadow of the mask onto the detector, and this shadow is shifted in a unique way that depends on the source’s sky location. About 11% of the sky is at least partially coded in the BAT’s field of view. Once it detects a burst, the BAT’s computer reconstructs the observed part of the sky and calculates a rough localization (to within 3 arcminutes, or better than 0.1 degrees) for it. This position is immediately transmitted to the ground and distributed to astronomers worldwide through NASA’s General Coordinates Network . Speed is essential because GRBs fade quickly, and this information allows other telescopes to begin the search right away. The BAT also performs an all-sky high-energy X-ray survey, capturing images every few minutes when not on burst duty. The BAT compares sources found in these images against an on-board catalog of X-ray sources, and those either not listed in the catalog or showing large variability are deemed transients. Their locations are distributed to the astronomical community just like those of the bursts. X-ray Telescope Swift’s XRT measures the light curves — brightness changes through time — of GRBs and afterglows over a wide energy range, from 0.2 to 10 kiloelectronvolts (keV, or up to thousands of times the energy of visible light). It also collects spectra, the distribution of X-ray energies, analogous to colors in visible light. For a typical GRB, the XRT can pinpoint its location to about 3-arcsecond accuracy (or less than a thousandth of a degree) within 10 seconds. It can study its X-ray counterpart within 70 seconds of burst discovery and continue observations for days to weeks. Prior to Swift, long, detailed X-ray observations of GRB afterglows had been difficult to obtain because the few X-ray telescopes in space could not target the burst until hours or days later. X-rays from the initial flash of GRB 221009A — the BOAT, or Brightest Of All Time GRB — could be detected for weeks as dust in our galaxy scattered the light back to us. This resulted in the appearance of an extraordinary set of expanding rings. Images captured over 12 days by the X-ray Telescope aboard NASA’s Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory were combined to make this movie, shown here in arbitrary colors. NASA/Swift/A. Beardmore (University of Leicester) Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope The UVOT captures the ultraviolet and visible-light properties of sources, is aligned with the XRT, and provides the most accurate position (1 arcsecond or better) for GRBs. The UVOT is a 30-centimeter (12-inch) aperture reflecting telescope with a 17-arcminute field of view (roughly 60 percent of the apparent size of a full moon). It’s sensitive to wavelengths from red visible light to the far ultraviolet (650 to 170 nanometers). This makes the UVOT uniquely suited for afterglow studies. Its ultraviolet capability is not possible from the ground and, at the time of launch, it was much more sensitive than any other quick-reaction telescope in orbit. Swift’s UVOT acquired this ultraviolet view of the Andromeda galaxy (M31), the largest and closest spiral galaxy to our own. The image, constructed from 330 separate snapshots in three different UV wavelengths, reveals dense clusters of hot, young, blue stars in the disk beyond the galaxy's smooth, redder central bulge. Star clusters are especially plentiful along a ring about 150,000 light-years across. NASA/Swift/Stefan Immler (Goddard Space Flight Center) and Erin Grand (UMCP) When Swift observes a new GRB, the UVOT executes a predetermined program of exposure times and filter combinations. The initial images are immediately sent to the ground, both for use as a finding chart by observers and as a comparison to archival observations of the same patch of sky, which allows for detection of a new source that could be a GRB’s optical counterpart. Filtered observations provide the source’s behavior over time as a function of wavelength. Once Swift slews to a new burst, the UVOT acquires a 150-second exposure of the target field. A 2-by-2 arcminute portion surrounding the GRB position, determined by the XRT, is radioed to the ground in less than a minute. The Swift Operations Center automatically posts this image to the General Coordinates Network. During subsequent ground contacts, the full frame of the finder image is sent. Images generally contain at least 15 stars listed in existing catalogs, allowing for localizations of less than one arcsecond. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Galaxies Black Holes Stars Exoplanets

Earth Observatory EO Explorer Explore more than 13,000 images Click on a numbered circle to zoom in on that area and view more stories. Click on a solid dot to view a preview image and a link to read the story. Explore your backyard or the other side of the Earth with EO Explorer. For more than 25 years, the Earth Observatory has published stories from all over our planet. Now we encourage you to explore those stories in a different way: by location. You may filter the stories by de-selecting either the Image of the Day or Natural Events checkboxes (upper right of the map), or you can leave both boxes checked to view everything. You may also browse our imagery topically by visiting the Image of the Day or Natural Events topical pages. Note: About one-third of our stories are global in scope and do not appear on this map. Get the Earth Observatory in your Inbox Subscribe to our newsletters We will never share your email address. Privacy Policy Sign Up

Earth Observatory 3 min read Hurricane Otis Image of the Day for October 26, 2023 Otis went from tropical storm to major hurricane in a matter of hours before barreling into Mexico’s Pacific Coast as a category 5 storm. NASA Earth Observatory Oct 26, 2023 Article View more Images of the Day: Oct 25, 2023 Oct 27, 2023 Instruments: NOAA-20 — VIIRS Topics: Cyclones Extreme Weather October 24, 2023 Hurricane Otis hit Mexico’s Pacific Coast as a ferocious category 5 storm on October 25, 2023, breaking regional records for the strength and speed of its intensification. Storm surge, flooding, and mudslides, as well as damage to infrastructure and an airport, have been reported in the state of Guerrero. Prior to landfall, the VIIRS (Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite) sensor on the NOAA-20 satellite captured this false-color image of the storm at about 08:30 Universal Time (2:30 a.m. in Acapulco) on October 24, 2023. When the image was acquired, Otis was still a tropical storm with sustained winds of 100 kilometers (65 miles) per hour, and was located about 335 kilometers (210 miles) south-southeast of Acapulco. The image shows infrared brightness temperature data, which is useful for distinguishing cooler cloud structures (white and blue) from warmer surfaces below (yellow). The coolest temperatures are associated with areas of tall clouds. Note, however, that the storm at this time did not yet have an eye. Otis remained a tropical storm until the afternoon of October 24. Then, in a matter of hours, it rapidly intensified into a major hurricane. By 06:25 Universal Time (12:25 a.m. in Acapulco) on October 25, Otis made landfall near the beach resort town with sustained winds of 270 kilometers (165 miles) per hour. According to news reports , Otis was the strongest hurricane on record to hit Mexico’s Pacific Coast, and the fastest-strengthening storm on record in the northeast Pacific. Scott Braun, a research meteorologist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center and project scientist for the TROPICS mission , said that Otis had “all the right ingredients” for rapid intensification. Those include elements such as warm sea surface temperatures, a deep layer of warm ocean water, lots of moisture, and relatively low vertical wind shear. “Conditions were present for rapid intensification, but it is hard to say at this time why the rate and magnitude of intensification were so great,” Braun said. Forecast discussions from the National Hurricane Center pointed to some of these conditions and noted that statistical models showed a good probability for rapid intensification. “A key challenge for any forecaster is predicting the timing and magnitude of rapid intensification,” Braun said. “It’s extremely difficult to do.” Data collected by TROPICS—short for Time-Resolved Observations of Precipitation structure and storm Intensity with a Constellation of Smallsats—will help weather researchers learn more about the environmental factors contributing the structure and intensity of storms similar to Otis. Such information could prove useful for NOAA, the U.S. Joint Typhoon Warning Center, and international agencies responsible for developing hurricane, typhoon, and cyclone forecasts. References & Resources NASA Earth Observatory (2023, July 21) Watching a Hurricane Intensify . Accessed October 25, 2023. National Hurricane Center (2023, October 25) Hurricane Otis Tropical Cyclone Update . Accessed October 25, 2023. National Hurricane Center (2023, October 24) Tropical Storm Otis Advisory Number 8 . Accessed October 25, 2023. NBC News (2023, October 25) Otis live updates: Communication down in Acapulco after storm hits region . Accessed October 25, 2023. The Washington Post (2023, October 24) Hurricane Otis makes landfall near Acapulco as Category 5 storm . Accessed October 25, 2023. NASA Earth Observatory image by Michala Garrison, using VIIRS data from NASA EOSDIS LANCE , GIBS/Worldview , and the Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS). Story by Kathryn Hansen . Downloads October 24, 2023 JPEG (3.85 MB) You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo 5 min read Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the strongest storms the eastern Pacific… Article Tropical Storm Arthur 2 min read The first named storm of the 2026 Atlantic hurricane season brought intense rainfall and the threat of flash flooding to… Article Lala Batters Hawaii 3 min read The powerful storm delivered extreme rainfall and damaging winds to the state, passing the Island of Hawaiʻi as a category… Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 2 min read Hurricane Patricia Nears Mexico Image of the Day for October 24, 2015 The strongest hurricane ever recorded around the Americas is set for landfall on the southwest coast of Mexico. NASA Earth Observatory Oct 24, 2015 Article View more Images of the Day: Oct 23, 2015 Oct 25, 2015 Instruments: ISS — RapidScat Terra — MODIS Topics: Cyclones Extreme Weather October 23, 2015 Hurricane Patricia is expected to make landfall in southwestern Mexico as an “extremely dangerous” category 5 storm on the evening of October 23, 2015. According to the National Hurricane Center (NHC), Patricia is the strongest hurricane ever recorded by the agency, which is responsible for monitoring the Atlantic and eastern Pacific oceans. At 17:30 UTC (11:30 p.m. Central Daylight Time) on October 23, the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on NASA’s Terra satellite acquired the top image of Hurricane Patricia over the eastern Pacific Ocean. When this image was acquired, the hurricane was a category 5 storm with maximum sustained winds of 325 kilometers (200 miles) per hour. Its center was located about 140 kilometers (85 miles) southwest of Manzanillo, Mexico. The second image shows wind speed and direction near the ocean surface, as measured on October 23 by the International Space Station-Rapid Scatterometer (ISS-RapidScat). Brighter shades of blue represent stronger surface winds. A photograph of the storm was captured from the space station by NASA astronaut Scott Kelly. Meteorologists were impressed by the rate at which Patricia intensified, growing from a tropical storm to a category 5 hurricane in just 24 hours, the NHC reported in a discussion on October 22 . As the forecasters noted: “This is a remarkable feat, with only Linda of 1997 intensifying at this rate in the satellite era.” After making landfall in southwest Mexico, the storm was expected to move north-northeast and quickly weaken as it reaches the mountainous interior. Still, flooding and landslides were a concern for the Mexican states of Nayarit, Jalisco, Colima, Michoacan, and Guerrero. Patricia is the ninth hurricane in the eastern Pacific to reach category 4 or 5 status during the 2015 season, which runs from mid May through November. The season in the North Pacific has been a busy one that has been at least partly fueled by a strong El Niño . References & Resources Capital Weather Gang (2015, October 23) ‘Potentially catastrophic’ Patricia becomes strongest hurricane ever recorded, to slam Mexico today. The Washington Post . Accessed October 23, 2015. NASA Earth Observatory (2015, August 5) El Niño Conditions Are Growing Stronger. National Weather Service, National Hurricane Center (2015, October 23) Hurricane Patricia . Accessed October 23, 2015. Unisys Weather (2015, October 23) Hurricane-5 Patricia . Accessed October 23, 2015. NASA image (top) by Jeff Schmaltz, LANCE/EOSDIS Rapid Response . NASA Earth Observatory map (bottom) by Joshua Stevens, using RapidScat data from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory . Caption by Kathryn Hansen. Downloads October 23, 2015 JPEG (10.71 MB) October 23, 2015 PNG (2.16 MB) You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo 5 min read Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the strongest storms the eastern Pacific… Article A Trio of Tropical Cyclones in the Pacific 4 min read The Pacific was buzzing with storms while the Atlantic was notably quiet. Article Lala Batters Hawaii 3 min read The powerful storm delivered extreme rainfall and damaging winds to the state, passing the Island of Hawaiʻi as a category… Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 3 min read Lala Batters Hawaii Image of the Day for August 18, 2026 The powerful storm delivered extreme rainfall and damaging winds to the state, passing the Island of Hawaiʻi as a category 1 hurricane. NASA Earth Observatory Aug 18, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Aug 17, 2026 Aug 19, 2026 Instruments: NOAA-20 — VIIRS Suomi NPP — VIIRS Topics: Cyclones August 16, 2026 August 15, 2026 The spiraling clouds of a tropical storm are centered near the Hawaiian island of Kauaʻi. NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin The spiraling clouds of a hurricane appear near the Hawaiian Islands. Its eye is just south of the Island of Hawaiʻi. NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin August 16, 2026 August 15, 2026 The spiraling clouds of a tropical storm are centered near the Hawaiian island of Kauaʻi. NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin The spiraling clouds of a hurricane appear near the Hawaiian Islands. Its eye is just south of the Island of Hawaiʻi. NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin August 16, 2026 August 15, 2026 Curtain Toggle 2-Up Image Details Lala skirts south of the Island of Hawaiʻi as a category 1 hurricane in the right image, acquired by the VIIRS (Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite) on the Suomi NPP satellite on August 15, 2026, at about 1:45 p.m. Hawaii Standard Time (23:45 Universal Time). The storm decreased in intensity while tracking northwest and was a tropical storm when the VIIRS on the NOAA-20 satellite captured the left image about 24 hours later. NASA Earth Observatory images by Lauren Dauphin. The Island of Hawaiʻi narrowly avoided a direct landfall by Hurricane Lala in mid-August 2026. The storm nonetheless delivered serious damage as it passed just south of the island on August 15 (above, right) as a category 1 storm on the Saffir-Simpson wind scale . Lala brought rainfall totals exceeding 20 inches (50 centimeters) to parts of the island, causing flash flooding and ongoing mudflow risks. The highest rainfall total for the storm— 43.55 inches (110.6 centimeters) as of the morning of August 17—was recorded at Laupāhoehoe, on the coast northwest of Hilo. Lala downed trees, damaged bridges, and knocked homes off their foundations . Coastal areas were pummeled by large waves, while the summit of Mauna Kea, over 13,000 feet (4,000 meters) above sea level, experienced blizzard conditions . By early afternoon on August 16, when the other image (left) was acquired, the storm had tracked northwest, roughly parallel to the island chain, and was southwest of Kauaʻi. Lala had decreased in intensity to a tropical storm, with sustained winds of 65 miles (105 kilometers) per hour, according to the National Hurricane Center . While the Island of Hawaiʻi took the brunt of the storm, other islands also saw destructive effects. Strong winds caused widespread power outages, with more than 220,000 customers statewide without power as of the afternoon of August 16, according to news reports. Across the islands , wind and rain damaged infrastructure, and floodwaters and debris rendered roads impassable. It has been an active tropical cyclone season in the Eastern Pacific so far in 2026, meteorologists note , consistent with what scientists expect during an El Niño , which has been underway as of mid-June. Warm water in the equatorial Pacific—the hallmark of El Niño—and the moisture and energy it transfers to the atmosphere help fuel nascent tropical storms. Lack of wind shear , another typical El Niño pattern in this region, also encourages tropical storms to develop and strengthen. The Atlantic hurricane season, in contrast, has been relatively calm , as greater wind shear over the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea during an El Niño inhibits hurricane formation by dissipating the upward motion of heat. NASA Earth Observatory images by Lauren Dauphin, using VIIRS data from NASA EOSDIS LANCE , GIBS/Worldview , and the Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS) . Story by Lindsey Doermann. Downloads August 15, 2026 JPEG (2.54 MB) August 16, 2026 JPEG (2.39 MB) References & Resources AccuWeather (2026, August 17) Lala's recent close encounter with Hawaii continues to cause trouble Monday . Accessed August 17, 2026. Colorado State University (2026, August 17) Northern Hemisphere Tropical Cyclone Activity for 2026 . Accessed August 17, 2026. Honolulu Civil Beat (2026, August 16) Lala’s Wrath: Homes Swept Away, Some Power Outages May Last Months . Accessed August 17, 2026. National Hurricane Center (2026, August 17) Hurricane LALA Advisory Archive . Accessed August 17, 2026. Yale Climate Connections (2026, August 12) Tropical Storm Lala heads toward Hawaii; life-threatening floods possible . Accessed August 17, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo 5 min read Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the strongest storms the eastern Pacific… Article Tropical Storm Arthur 2 min read The first named storm of the 2026 Atlantic hurricane season brought intense rainfall and the threat of flash flooding to… Article A Trio of Tropical Cyclones in the Pacific 4 min read The Pacific was buzzing with storms while the Atlantic was notably quiet. Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 2 min read Tropical Storm Arthur Image of the Day for June 19, 2026 The first named storm of the 2026 Atlantic hurricane season brought intense rainfall and the threat of flash flooding to the U.S. Gulf Coast. NASA Earth Observatory Jun 19, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Jun 18, 2026 Jun 22, 2026 Instruments: Terra — MODIS Topics: Cyclones Natural color brightness temperature Tropical Storm Arthur’s white storm clouds cover the waters off the U.S. Gulf Coast. Some clouds extend inland over parts of Texas and Louisiana. NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison White and purple areas of cloud off the Gulf Coast indicate the cooler areas of cloud tops associated with Tropical Storm Arthur. NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison Natural color brightness temperature Tropical Storm Arthur’s white storm clouds cover the waters off the U.S. Gulf Coast. Some clouds extend inland over parts of Texas and Louisiana. NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison White and purple areas of cloud off the Gulf Coast indicate the cooler areas of cloud tops associated with Tropical Storm Arthur. NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison Natural color brightness temperature Curtain Toggle 2-Up Image Details Images from the MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) on NASA’s Terra satellite show Tropical Storm Arthur on the morning of June 17, 2026. The left image is natural color; the right shows infrared signals known as brightness temperature. NASA Earth Observatory images by Michala Garrison. Tropical Storm Arthur, the first named storm of the 2026 Atlantic hurricane season, brought high winds and heavy rain to the U.S. Gulf Coast in mid-June. NASA’s Terra satellite captured this natural-color image (left) at 10:30 a.m. Central Time (15:30 Universal Time) on June 17. The second image (right) depicts infrared signals known as brightness temperature, which help distinguish cooler cloud tops (white and purple) from the warmer surface below (yellow and orange). Around the time these images were acquired, the system had just recently been designated a tropical storm, according to the National Hurricane Center (NHC). Though Arthur stayed below hurricane strength, it still delivered strong winds to parts of the Gulf Coast as it tracked northeast. The storm had maximum sustained winds of 40 miles (65 kilometers) per hour around the time these images were captured. Tropical-storm-force winds extended 175 miles (280 kilometers) from the storm’s center, the NHC reported . Measurements at Galveston, Texas, for instance, showed a gust of 48 miles per hour. The storm also produced heavy rainfall that the National Weather Service warned could lead to life-threatening flash flooding. Estimates from IMERG (the Integrated Multi-Satellite Retrievals for GPM), a product of the GPM (Global Precipitation Measurement) mission, showed high rainfall rates over Gulf waters and extending inland on June 17. As Arthur weakened and became less organized, it continued to bring abundant moisture to central Gulf Coast states on June 18. The National Weather Service reported rainfall rates of 3 inches (7.6 centimeters) per hour in southeastern Louisiana. Forecasts indicated that storm-total rainfall amounts could exceed 12 inches (30 centimeters) in areas, with some locations seeing totals approaching 20 inches (51 centimeters). NASA Earth Observatory images by Michala Garrison, using MODIS data from NASA EOSDIS LANCE and GIBS/Worldview . Story by Kathryn Hansen. Downloads June 17, 2026: Natural color JPEG (2.94 MB) June 17, 2026: Brightness temperature JPEG (2.51 MB) References & Resources National Hurricane Center (2026, June 17) Tropical Storm ARTHUR Advisory Archive . Accessed June 18, 2026. National Public Radio (2026, June 17) Tropical Storm Arthur is the first named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season . Accessed June 18, 2026. National Weather Service, Office of Water Prediction (2026, June 18) Experimental: Tropical Flood Hazard Outlook Product Archive . Accessed June 18, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo 5 min read Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the strongest storms the eastern Pacific… Article Lala Batters Hawaii 3 min read The powerful storm delivered extreme rainfall and damaging winds to the state, passing the Island of Hawaiʻi as a category… Article Typhoon Jangmi 2 min read The sprawling storm promised to deliver torrential rain across a wide swath of southern Japan. Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 4 min read A Trio of Tropical Cyclones in the Pacific Image of the Day for September 4, 2026 The Pacific was buzzing with storms while the Atlantic was notably quiet. NASA Earth Observatory Sep 04, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Sep 3, 2026 Sep 7, 2026 Instruments: DSCOVR — EPIC Topics: Clouds Cyclones Extreme Weather When hurricane forecasters released their seasonal outlooks in spring 2026, the El Niño brewing in the Pacific contributed to predictions of below-normal activity in the Atlantic basin but above-normal activity in the northeastern and central Pacific basins . In early September, near the climatological peak of hurricane season, those spring outlooks were on target, with the eastern Pacific buzzing with activity and the Atlantic notably quiet. As of September 3, the Northeast Pacific had produced 15 named storms and six hurricanes, well above the norm for that point in the season. The Atlantic basin, meanwhile, laboring under unfavorable wind shear conditions, had produced just five named storms and no hurricanes. El Niño typically enhances hurricane activity in the eastern and central Pacific basins because of the unusually warm water temperatures it brings to those parts of the ocean. It tends to suppress hurricane activity in the Atlantic basin by shifting large-scale circulation patterns in a way that makes it harder to sustain storms there. At 1:14 p.m. Pacific Daylight Time (20:14 Universal Time) on September 1, NASA’s EPIC (Earth Polychromatic Imaging Camera) on the DSCOVR (Deep Space Climate Observatory) satellite captured an image of three tropical cyclones churning simultaneously in the Pacific, along with one in the Atlantic. A band of clouds and thunderstorms associated with the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is visible to the south of the storms. The spacecraft was nearly 1 million miles from Earth and just shy of 93 million miles from the Sun when the image was acquired. The trio of storms in the Pacific were Lowell, Karina, and Marie. Of the three, Lowell became the strongest, with winds reaching category 5 strength for several hours on September 2. Around the same time, Karina , spinning a few thousand kilometers to the east, achieved category 4 strength, a rare case of category 4 and 5 hurricanes occurring simultaneously in the area. Marie , spinning southwest of Baja California, was still a tropical storm when the image was acquired but was strengthening as it moved northwest. In the Atlantic, Tropical Storm Edouard was visible to EPIC over Louisiana and Texas, shortly after the short-lived storm made landfall. It brought torrential rains and strong winds that downed trees and power lines. Some areas received 15 to 24 inches (38 to 61 centimeters) of rain, according to National Weather Service meteorologists. As of September 3, the Atlantic basin's total accumulated cyclone energy (ACE) index was 4.4, about 9 percent of normal for that date, according to statistics compiled by Colorado State University meteorologists. Meanwhile, the Northeast Pacific basin's ACE was 130, about 50 percent above normal. The ACE index incorporates both the intensity and longevity of storms, making it easier to compare individual storms and seasons. Several NASA Earth-observing platforms provide data that can aid in emergency preparedness before landfall and damage assessment and response afterward. Use the “Events” tab on NASA's Worldview browser to track current hurricanes and explore related NASA data products. NASA Earth Observatory image by Lauren Dauphin, using data from DSCOVR EPIC . Story by Adam Voiland. Downloads September 1, 2026 JPEG (1.49 MB) References & Resources AccuWeather (2023, June 6) Experts say this metric is a more reliable way to quantify the true strength of hurricane season . Accessed September 3, 2026. Colorado State University (2026, September 3) Northern Hemisphere Tropical Cyclone Activity for 2026 . Accessed September 3, 2026. NASA Earthdata, Hurricanes . Accessed September 3, 2026. NASA, El Niño . Accessed September 3, 2026. NASA Space Place (2025, April 3) How Do Hurricanes Form ? Accessed September 3, 2026. National Hurricane Center (2026, September 3) Top News of the Day . Accessed September 3, 2026 Newsweek (2026, September 2) El Niño is Reshaping this Year's Hurricane Season . Accessed September 3, 2026. NOAA (2026, June 2) How does El Niño Impact Atlantic Hurricane Season . Accessed September 3, 2026. NOAA (2026, May 21) NOAA 2026 Eastern Pacific Hurricane Season Outlook . Accessed September 3, 2026. Yale Climate Connections (2026, September 2) Edouard delivers an outsized flash-flood punch to eastern Texas . Accessed September 3, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo 5 min read Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the strongest storms the eastern Pacific… Article Lala Batters Hawaii 3 min read The powerful storm delivered extreme rainfall and damaging winds to the state, passing the Island of Hawaiʻi as a category… Article Tropical Storm Arthur 2 min read The first named storm of the 2026 Atlantic hurricane season brought intense rainfall and the threat of flash flooding to… Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory Subscribe The Earth Observatory distributes three different newsletters - subscribe today! Keep Exploring Discover More From NASA Earth Science Earth Observatory NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day: images, stories, and discoveries about the environment, Earth systems, and climate. Explore Earth Science Earth Science at Work NASA Earth Science helps Americans respond to challenges and societal needs — such as wildland fires, hurricanes, and water supplies… Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day: sharing images, stories, and discoveries about the environment, Earth systems, and climate that emerge from NASA research, including its satellite missions, in-the-field research, and models. Filter by Topic Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo 5 min read Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the strongest storms the eastern Pacific… Sep 25, 2026 Cloudy Cloak Over the Northwest 2 min read A low-lying cloud layer brought autumn ambience to western Washington and Oregon, while mountainous areas near the coast remained above… Sep 24, 2026 Boom Year for Desert Blooms 3 min read Carpets of wildflowers burst from arid, ochre-colored land in Western Australia following winter rains. Sep 23, 2026 An Epic View of the Seasons 6 min read The tilt in Earth's axis of rotation makes the apparent position of continents shift with the seasons in imagery from… Sep 22, 2026 Arctic Melt Season Length Levels Off 4 min read While the sea ice melt season has lengthened dramatically in most of the satellite era, the trend unexpectedly stabilized around… Sep 21, 2026 Lake Powell Drops to Record-Low Levels 4 min read Snow drought and unusually warm temperatures in the Colorado Basin in 2026 helped drive down reservoir water storage in the… Sep 18, 2026 Summer Goes Out With a Heat Dome 3 min read Temperature records toppled across the central and southern U.S. as the autumnal equinox approached. Sep 17, 2026 Purple Haze Aurora 5 min read 'Scuse me while some charged particles kiss the sky. Sep 16, 2026 An Accidental Impact Crater Discovery 5 min read An amateur astronomer scouting online satellite maps for campsites in Quebec found an impact crater instead. Sep 15, 2026 An Early Look at Fall Color in Canada 3 min read Reds, yellows, and oranges are already sweeping across tundra landscapes in Nunavut. Sep 14, 2026 Monterrey Amid Mountains 4 min read Mexico’s second-largest metropolitan area borders on folded rock layers of the Sierra Madre Oriental. Sep 11, 2026 Dust Storm Sweeps Over Mali 2 min read At a time of year when dust storm activity winds down, a plume of dust blanketed parts of the West… Sep 10, 2026 Anak Krakatau Rumbles Again 3 min read A powerful eruption from the Indonesian volcano lofted ash into the atmosphere, disrupting thousands of flights and degrading air quality. Sep 9, 2026 The Otherworldly Geology of Vasquez Rocks 4 min read Layers of sedimentary rock that jut from the Soledad Basin at surprising angles have long enthralled television and film producers,… Sep 8, 2026 A Bright Spot at Mount Michael 3 min read With austral winter nearing its end, clouds cleared for a satellite view of volcanic activity in the remote South Atlantic. Sep 7, 2026 A Trio of Tropical Cyclones in the Pacific 4 min read The Pacific was buzzing with storms while the Atlantic was notably quiet. Sep 4, 2026 Peatland Fires Darken Skies in Indonesia 6 min read With Indonesia gripped by drought, fires are smoldering on the surface and underground. Sep 3, 2026 Drought Intensifies Across Puerto Rico 4 min read Rainfall deficits and high temperatures have created unusually dry conditions and have spurred water shortages on much of the tropical… Sep 2, 2026 Ice Island Survives Run-In With Joe Island 5 min read In summer 2026, a substantial iceberg calved from Petermann Glacier in northwest Greenland and swiftly drifted into Nares Strait, colliding… Sep 1, 2026 Pasterze Hangs on as Austria’s Largest Glacier 4 min read One narrowing icefall remains the linchpin for the Alpine glacier—and it may not be long for this world. Aug 31, 2026 The Forested Floodplains of Congaree National Park 4 min read The meandering Congaree River sustains towering forest ecosystems and fashions oxbow lakes as it shifts across its floodplain. Aug 28, 2026 Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Explore Earth Science Earth Science at Work NASA Earth Science helps Americans respond to challenges and societal needs — such as wildland fires, hurricanes, and water supplies… Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 3 min read Boom Year for Desert Blooms Image of the Day for September 23, 2026 Carpets of wildflowers burst from arid, ochre-colored land in Western Australia following winter rains. NASA Earth Observatory Sep 23, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Sep 22, 2026 Sep 24, 2026 Instruments: Landsat 8 — OLI Photograph Topics: Vegetation August 19, 2025 August 30, 2026 Branching riverbeds and roads cut through rusty orange land in the Western Australian outback. NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin Land in the Western Australian outback appears mostly rusty orange but contains areas of green, especially in riverbeds. NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin August 19, 2025 August 30, 2026 Branching riverbeds and roads cut through rusty orange land in the Western Australian outback. NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin Land in the Western Australian outback appears mostly rusty orange but contains areas of green, especially in riverbeds. NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin August 19, 2025 August 30, 2026 Curtain Toggle 2-Up Arid shrublands in Western Australia were bursting with life in late austral winter 2026, when a profusion of wildflowers brought vivid colors to the rusty ochre landscape. After several wetter-than-normal months earlier in the year, dormant seeds in the soil awoke to produce carpets of blooms. Local experts think the display could be the best the area has seen in nearly two decades . The images above, captured with the OLI (Operational Land Imager) on the NASA-USGS Landsat 8 satellite, compare the more verdant landscape of late August 2026 (right) with a similar time in 2025 (left), when it was drier. This area is located about 600 kilometers (370 miles) north of Perth in the Murchison region, one of Western Australia’s main areas for grazing sheep and cattle. The local vegetation includes grasses, saltbush , and the slow-growing evergreen mulga tree. White flowers carpet the Western Australian outback. © CSIRO Australia, September 16, 2026 Every so often, a variety of wildflowers makes an appearance, too. In 2026, rainfall totals were above average in June and very much above average in August due to several cold fronts moving through the area, according to Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology. The rains helped rouse a diverse mix of flowers to bloom across the outback, including on a radio astronomy site managed by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Australia’s national science agency. The flower show included some threatened species , which the observatory has helped monitor on its formerly pastoral land. Though the spectacle underfoot might have momentarily stolen the show, Inyarrimanha Ilgari Bundara , the CSIRO Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory, is primarily focused on what’s overhead and the exploration of deep space. At the Murchison site, CSIRO operates several antenna arrays that observe and catalog objects in the southern sky. The remote facility is situated within a “radio quiet” zone, where terrestrial communications and electronic devices are controlled to limit electromagnetic interference with the instruments. Mulla mulla flowers appear in front of CSIRO's Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder ( ASKAP ) radio telescope. © CSIRO Australia, September 16, 2026 Other telescopes in CSIRO’s purview in Australia have played crucial roles in NASA missions from the agency’s early years to today. The Murriyang radio telescope in Parkes, New South Wales, tracked Mariner 2 —the first successful planetary science mission—in 1962 and was an important receiving station for the Apollo 11 mission to the Moon in 1969. CSIRO also manages and operates the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex , one of three facilities in NASA’s global Deep Space Network that supports interplanetary spacecraft missions and collects radar and radio astronomy observations. Both supported the Artemis II mission in April 2026. NASA Earth Observatory images by Lauren Dauphin, using Landsat data from the U.S. Geological Survey . Photos © CSIRO Australia, September 16, 2026. Story by Lindsey Doermann. Downloads August 19, 2025 JPEG (12.99 MB) August 30, 2026 JPEG (13.92 MB) References & Resources Australian Bureau of Meteorology (2026) Australian climate history – Climate summaries . Accessed September 22, 2026. Australian Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts (2008, August) Murchison bioregion (WA) . Accessed September 22, 2026. CSIRO (2026, September 16) World-leading radio telescopes give space for stunning wildflowers . Accessed September 22, 2026. CSIRO (2024, June 24) NASA and CSIRO: partners in space . Accessed September 22, 2026. CSIRO, Inyarrimanha Ilgari Bundara, our Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory . Accessed September 22, 2026. The Guardian (2026, September 13) Blankets of colour: Western Australia’s wildflower season bursts into life – in pictures . Accessed September 22, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Bountiful Roebuck Bay 4 min read Tidal and seasonal shifts leave their mark on this crescent-shaped, productive bay in Western Australia's Kimberley region. Article An Epic View of the Seasons 6 min read The tilt in Earth's axis of rotation makes the apparent position of continents shift with the seasons in imagery from… Article Great Balls of Fire 4 min read An astronaut on the International Space Station was surprised to photograph a shower of light streaking through the darkness while… Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 9 min read A Celebration of Clouds From Space, Earth Has an Elegant Atmosphere NASA Earth Observatory Dec 20, 2016 Article Contents Riding the Wave Making Waves Solitary Circulation Following Coastlines Lofted Over Land Over the Hills Filling the Valleys Looks Like Snow; False Color Says No A Fiery Beginning Punching the Sky Framed Reflecting on Human Influence References and Related Reading Earth Observatory Topics: Clouds Earth has been referred to as "the blue planet" due to its abundance of water. "The cloudy planet" would be equally appropriate. At any given time, about two-thirds of Earth's surface is covered by these masses of water and ice particles suspended in the atmosphere. Clouds can be a nuisance for scientists trying to use satellites to observe features on the surface—such as volcanic eruptions, floods, or phytoplankton blooms. But for some scientists, clouds are exactly what they want to see. Clouds help make the weather and affect Earth's climate, and they can make a difference in the success or failure of efforts to simulate both. (Correctly representing clouds in climate models, it turns out, is really hard to do). But sometimes, clouds manifest in such a way that they simply inspire awe. Nearly 70 percent of Earth's surface is covered by clouds at any given time. While cloud cover can obscure the surface and frustrate satellite imagery of land and sea, clouds offer a beautiful glimpse of our atmosphere and its processes. NASA Earth Observatory/Joshua Stevens Intrigued by some cloud images that we found in our research, as well as several posted on social media, we started a conversation with NASA cloud scientist Bastiaan Van Diedenhoven. Every few days, while browsing satellite imagery, Van Diedenhoven notices a unique cloud feature and shares it via social media . But you won't see many storms: “Storms are interesting, but they're kind of obvious," he said. “I guess I'm looking for things that other people won't see." Rain clouds obscured the tops of skyscrapers on November 15, 2016, as I spoke with Van Diedenhoven and colleagues at NASA's Goddard institute for Space Studies (GISS) in New York. The group discussed new advances in their study of cloud microphysics. Then, on a lighter note, they turned to the series of images below and described what caught their eyes. All of the images show that the common cloud can take on a wide range of elegant forms. The value in looking at clouds from space, according to Van Diedenhoven, is the big picture. For example, the wide, satellite view might show that the clouds dropping rain on us today are actually part of a system that formed days ago over a completely different part of the planet. “You're really getting the perspective of the Earth as a whole, and as a complex system where many things interact," Van Diedenhoven said. “You don't get that perspective if you look from below." Riding the Wave download large image (8.2 MB, JPEG, 5428x3619) NASA Earth Observatory/Joshua Stevens, using Landsat data from the U.S. Geological Survey On August 13, 2016, the Operational Land Imager (OLI) on Landsat 8 captured this image of clouds off the coast of Mauritania. You can't see it directly, but air masses from Africa and the Atlantic Ocean are colliding in this image. There is, however, a visibly striking outcome: The collision produces a wave structure in the atmosphere. Parts of these waves are favorable for cloud formation, while other parts are not. The dust blowing out from Africa appears to be “riding the waves." Dust has been known to affect cloud growth, but it probably has little to do with the cloud pattern observed here. Making Waves download large image (3.4 MB, JPEG, 2000x1600) NASA/Jeff Schmaltz, using MODIS data from LANCE/EOSDIS Rapid Response On November 27, 2015, the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on NASA's Terra satellite captured this image of icebergs floating offshore of South Georgia Island, more than 1,600 kilometers (1,000 miles) east-northeast of Tierra del Fuego . Two of the larger bergs are big enough to force air masses up and over the ice. The resulting ripples in the atmosphere give rise to “wave clouds." The smaller bergs only produce a “cloud wake." Just as a ship leaves a V-shaped wake in the water, icebergs can leave behind similar wake in low-level clouds. Solitary Circulation download large image (3.7 MB, JPEG, 3000x2000) NASA Earth Observatory image by Joshua Stevens, using MODIS data from LANCE/EOSDIS Rapid Response The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on NASA’s Terra satellite captured this image of a strange system off the coast of Morocco on July 10, 2016. “It looks like a hurricane, but it's not," Van Diedenhoven said. Instead, the system is very small—about 100 kilometers across—and is made up of shallow clouds. “Hurricanes have a greater vertical extent. This is really just a cute, dynamic feature in the atmosphere." Following Coastlines download large image (8.4 MB, JPEG, 3000x2000) NASA Earth Observatory/ Joshua Stevens, using Landsat data from the U.S. Geological Survey . On April 8, 2014, Landsat 8 captured this classic example of marine stratocumulus clouds off the coast of China. The ocean is cool and, unlike the land, does not heat up much throughout a day. Cool, moist marine air commonly gives rise to dense clouds over the ocean. (Note that the image is false-color, giving the blues an unnatural tone.) In this case, an onshore wind carries the clouds from the ocean toward the land. But the land is warmer, drier, and unfavorable for cloud growth. As a result, any marine clouds that move onshore tend to evaporate, leaving a cloud layer that traces the coastline. Lofted Over Land download large image (9.8 MB, JPEG, 4500x4500) NASA Earth Observatory/Joshua Stevens, using Landsat data from the U.S. Geological Survey . Sometimes the opposite occurs, as was the case when Landsat 8 passed over Madagascar on January 20, 2015. Conditions along the Mania River were such that clouds formed over the land but not over the water. In the tropical rainforests of Madagascar, there is ample moisture available for cloud formation. But to form a cloud, you also need to cool the air, and the most common way to do that is by lifting it. Land that heats up throughout the day warms the near-surface air which then rises, cools, and condenses. In general, clouds form where the air is ascending (over land in this image), and they fail to form where it is descending (over the rivers). Over the Hills download large image (8.3 MB, JPEG, 5000x1667) NASA Earth Observatory/Joshua Stevens, using Landsat data from the U.S. Geological Survey These images, acquired by Landsat 8 between 2014 and 2016, pose another mystery. The New Zealand mountain ranges pictured here are clearly higher than the tops of the clouds. But are the mountains blocking the clouds from moving to the other side of the range, or are they helping to form the clouds? The answer depends on the direction of the wind. The ranges could simply be blocking the eastward or westward progression of air masses. Or the clouds could be born from air that gets forced up by the mountain range and then produces a cloud on the other side—a phenomenon known as the orographic lift effect. Filling the Valleys download large image (10.5 MB, JPEG, 2899x3306) NASA Earth Observatory/Joshua Stevens, using Landsat data from the U.S. Geological Survey During the austral winter (June through August) and early spring, Pacific oceanic and atmospheric conditions are often right for marine stratocumulus to develop off the coast of Chile and Peru. This image shows such clouds off of Peru on July 26, 2015. On some occasions, the prevailing winds move the clouds inland. Because the marine clouds are low, they are easily blocked by coastal hills and mountains. But low valleys open to the ocean, such as the Yauca and Acarí river canyons, allow the clouds to easily move inland. Looks Like Snow; False Color Says No True Color False Color True Color False Color True Color False Color Before and After Curtain Toggle 2-Up Image Details NASA Earth Observatory images by Joshua Stevens, using Landsat data from the U.S. Geological Survey . Downloads left image JPEG (446 KB) right image JPEG (554 KB) Clouds and snow both appear white in natural-color satellite images, which can make it difficult to tell the difference. On January 8, 2016, the Operational Land Imager on Landsat 8 captured these images of white-colored valleys in Vancouver, Canada. The varied texture in the natural color image (left) is one clue that these are clouds, not snow. But the details become more apparent when you look at the same scene in false-color (right). Ice absorbs shortwave infrared light and appears blue in the false-color image. Conversely, liquid clouds don't absorb that much shortwave infrared radiation, so they appear white. A Fiery Beginning download large image (10.9 MB, JPEG, 4489x2648) NASA Earth Observatory/Joshua Stevens, using MODIS data from LANCE/EOSDIS Rapid Response Energy from the Sun-warmed ground is not the only way to get air masses to lift, cool, and form clouds. That energy can also come from the heat of a volcano or, in this case, fire. NASA's Aqua satellite captured this image of a pyrocumulonimbus cloud on August 5, 2014, south of Yellowknife, Canada. Pyrocumulonimbus and pyrocumulus clouds—sometimes called “fire clouds"—are tall, cauliflower-shaped clouds that show up in satellite imagery as opaque white patches hovering over darker smoke. With the exception of their fiery origin, pyrocumulus clouds are similar to cumulus clouds in structure. Punching the Sky download large image (5.5 MB, JPEG, 3600x2800) NASA/Jeff Schmaltz, using MODIS data from LANCE/EOSDIS Rapid Response On January 29, 2007, Terra MODIS acquired this extraordinary example of a phenomenon known as “hole-punch clouds" over Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas. This strange phenomenon results from a combination of cold temperatures, air traffic, and perhaps atmospheric instability. If you were to look from below , it would appear as if part of the cloud was falling out of the sky. As it turns out, that's actually what's happening. The clouds are initially composed of liquid drops at a super-cooled temperature below 0° Celsius. As an airplane passes through a cloud, particles in its exhaust can create a disturbance that triggers freezing. Ice particles then quickly grow at the expense of water droplets. Eventually the ice crystals in these patches of clouds grow large enough that they literally fall out of the sky – earning hole-punch clouds their alternate name: “fallstreak holes." Framed download large image (4.8 MB, JPEG, 4272x3336) (NASA image/Jeff Schmaltz, using VIIRS data from LANCE/EOSDIS Rapid Response On June 1, 2016, the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) on the Suomi-NPP satellite captured this image of low stratus clouds framing iceberg A-56 as it drifted in the South Atlantic Ocean. The exact reason for the hole in the clouds is somewhat of a mystery. It could have formed by chance, although imagery from the days before and after this date suggest something else was at work. It could be that the relatively unobstructed path of the clouds over the ocean surface was interrupted by thermal instability created by the iceberg. If an obstacle is big enough, it can divert the low-level atmospheric flow around it, a phenomenon often caused by islands. Reflecting on Human Influence NASA/NOAA/GOES images and animation courtesy the GOES Project Science Team Hole-punch clouds are not the only types influenced by human activity. The Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES-West) captured this series of images of ship tracks amid natural marine clouds southwest of Vancouver Island on January 15, 2013. These clouds are seeded by the particles in ship exhaust. They are liquid clouds, but they appear brighter than surrounding clouds because the exhaust particles result in water being distributed over more and smaller droplets. This means their combined area is increased, which makes for a more reflective cloud. “Ship tracks are very striking to the eye," Van Diedenhoven said. “But they also show that we are changing the atmosphere and changing the clouds. Much of our current cloud research is about understanding how particles from human emissions change clouds in more subtle ways, but on much larger scales." References and Related Reading Ackerman, A.S. et al. (2004, October) The impact of humidity above stratiform clouds on indirect aerosol climate forcing. Nature, 432, 1014-1017. Heymsfield, A.J. et al. (2010, June) Aircraft-Induced Hole Punch and Canal Clouds: Inadvertent Cloud Seeding. BAMS. NASA Earth Observatory (2015, May 8) Cloudy Earth. NASA Earth Observatory, Clouds and Radiation . NASA Earth Observatory, Aerosols: Tiny Particles, Big Impact . NASA Earth Observatory story by By Kathryn Hansen and Joshua Stevens Share Details Last Updated Nov 25, 2025 Related Terms Earth Observatory Clouds You might also be interested in Cloudy Cloak Over the Northwest 2 min read A low-lying cloud layer brought autumn ambience to western Washington and Oregon, while mountainous areas near the coast remained above… Article INSPYRE 2 min read Designed to investigate how extreme wildfires can generate powerful thunderstorm-like clouds that inject smoke high into the atmosphere. Mission A Bright Spot at Mount Michael 3 min read With austral winter nearing its end, clouds cleared for a satellite view of volcanic activity in the remote South Atlantic. Article Keep Exploring Discover More From NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science at Work NASA Earth Science helps Americans respond to challenges and societal needs — such as wildland fires, hurricanes, and water supplies…

Earth Observatory 4 min read El Niño Is Underway Image of the Day for June 18, 2026 Satellite observations of sea surface height indicated that the 2026 event continued to strengthen in early June. NASA Earth Observatory Jun 18, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Jun 17, 2026 Jun 19, 2026 Instruments: Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich Topics: El Nino Southern Oscillation Sea Surface Topography Higher-than-normal sea surfaces (red) are visible in the central and eastern Pacific on June 8, 2026, a few days before El Niño was declared. Data for the map were acquired by the Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich satellite and processed by scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). NASA Earth Observatory/Lauren Dauphin El Niño, characterized by warmer-than-normal water temperatures in parts of the equatorial Pacific, made its return in June 2026. Observations of sea surface height from the Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich satellite that month indicated that the 2026 event was continuing to strengthen. The natural, recurring phenomenon can have widespread effects, typically bringing wetter conditions to the U.S. Southwest and drought to countries in the western Pacific, such as Indonesia and Australia. NOAA declared an El Niño on June 11, after sea surface temperatures in the central and eastern equatorial Pacific measured at least 0.5 degrees Celsius above average for several consecutive months. Meanwhile, NASA scientists have been observing a complementary sign of El Niño: areas of elevated sea surface height. When ocean water warms, it expands in volume and causes the sea surface to rise—making the water’s height a reliable indicator of ocean temperatures. Warmer-than-normal temperatures, hence higher sea surface heights, in parts of the equatorial Pacific Ocean are associated with El Niño. The map above depicts sea surface height anomalies across the central and eastern Pacific Ocean as observed on June 8, 2026. Shades of red indicate sea levels that were higher than average. Normal sea level conditions appear white, and lower areas are blue. Data for the map were acquired by the Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich satellite—launched in 2020 by NASA and led by ESA (European Space Agency)—and processed by scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Note that signals related to seasonal cycles and long-term trends have been removed to highlight sea level anomalies associated with El Niño and other short-term natural phenomena. Earlier in spring 2026, the satellite started to detect precursor signs of El Niño as swells of warm water hundreds of miles wide, known as Kelvin waves, moved from the western Pacific to the eastern Pacific. That happens when trade winds in the western equatorial Pacific weaken and then temporarily reverse to blow from the west. Warm water piles up in the east, deepening the warm surface layer, lowering the thermocline , and suppressing the upwelling that usually keeps waters along the Pacific coasts of the Americas cooler. This buildup of heat beneath the water’s surface is what sea surface height observations capture. It goes beyond surface temperature measurements to indicate how much heat is stored in the subsurface. That’s important because a shallow warm layer might not have much impact on climate and weather, while a large reservoir of heat below the surface can matter more. According to JPL sea level researcher Severine Fournier, deputy project scientist for Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich, conditions in the western Pacific on June 8 looked similar to those from the same time in 1997, a year when an exceptionally strong El Niño emerged. Warm conditions in the eastern Pacific in 2026 have lagged behind, however, with fewer Kelvin waves built up by the same date. Still, more warm Kelvin waves appeared to be approaching the eastern Pacific, meaning El Niño was still strengthening. Whether it catches up to 1997 depends on ocean activity in the coming weeks. “For now, it looks like it’s going to be a big one—more so than I would have said last week—but we still need more observations to know what’s going to happen.” NASA Earth Observatory image by Lauren Dauphin, using modified Copernicus Sentinel data (2023) processed by the European Space Agency and further processed by Josh Willis, Severin Fournier, and Kevin Marlis/NASA/JPL-Caltech. Story by Kathryn Hansen. Downloads June 8, 2026 JPEG (1.19 MB) References & Resources Climate Prediction Center/NCEP/NWS (2026, June 11) El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Diagnostic Discussion . Accessed June 17, 2026. NASA Earth Observatory (2025, September 25) El Niño . Accessed June 17, 2026. NASA Earth Observatory (2023, June 21) El Niño Returns . Accessed June 17, 2026. NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (2026, May 27) NASA-European Sea Level Mission Homes in on El Niño . Accessed June 17, 2026. NOAA (2026, June 11) El Nino forms, expected to strengthen, say NOAA forecasters . Accessed June 17, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. El Niño Alters Marine Life in the Pacific 5 min read Satellite measurements of chlorophyll at the sea surface signal shifts in the ocean’s nutrient supplies in mid-2026. Article Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo 5 min read Several ingredients came together off the Pacific coast of Mexico to generate one of the strongest storms the eastern Pacific… Article How the Tide Turns at the Mouth of the Elbe 4 min read The ocean’s ebbs and flows reveal dynamic tidal flats and a well-traveled shipping route along the coast of Germany. Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 5 min read El Niño Alters Marine Life in the Pacific Image of the Day for August 10, 2026 Satellite measurements of chlorophyll at the sea surface signal shifts in the ocean’s nutrient supplies in mid-2026. NASA Earth Observatory Aug 10, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Aug 7, 2026 Aug 11, 2026 Instruments: PACE Topics: El Nino Southern Oscillation Life on Earth june 2025 june 2026 NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison june 2025 june 2026 NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison NASA Earth Observatory/Michala Garrison june 2025 june 2026 Curtain Toggle 2-Up Image Details Concentrations of chlorophyll in the equatorial Pacific deviate from normal during El Niño events. These maps depict monthly average chlorophyll concentrations for June 2025 (left), under neutral conditions, and June 2026 (right), as El Niño was strengthening. Data come from the OCI (Ocean Color Instrument) on NASA’s PACE (Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean Ecosystem) satellite and are based on measurements of green and blue light from the ocean reflected back to the sensor. NASA Earth Observatory images by Michala Garrison. As of June 2026, El Niño has officially arrived . This naturally recurring phenomenon is characterized by warmer-than-normal water temperatures in parts of the equatorial Pacific along with changes to atmospheric and oceanic circulation patterns. Its regional effects range from desert floods to delayed monsoons to shifts in where tropical cyclones are more likely to form. NOAA’s Climate Prediction Center expects the current El Niño to continue to strengthen through the end of 2026, with a 97 percent chance of lasting through early Northern Hemisphere spring 2027. Even during El Niño's early stages, satellites have observed characteristic changes along the equatorial Pacific, such as warmer-than-normal sea surface temperatures and higher-than-normal sea surface height . Among the first ecological downstream effects are changes to the marine food web. The maps above show chlorophyll-a concentrations—the pigment present in most phytoplankton —as observed by the OCI (Ocean Color Instrument) on NASA’s PACE (Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean Ecosystem) satellite. In June 2025 (left), conditions were neutral, while in June 2026 (right), El Niño was strengthening. The most noticeable difference appears in the central Pacific, around the equator due north of New Zealand: chlorophyll concentrations, an indication of phytoplankton abundance, are substantially lower in 2026. This change is expected, said Matthew Kehrli and Graham Trolley, oceanographers in the Ocean Ecology Laboratory at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. That’s because during an El Niño, easterly equatorial trade winds weaken, the warm surface layer of the ocean extends deeper, and the upwelling of cool, nutrient-rich water that typically fuels phytoplankton growth is suppressed. As the El Niño progresses, the scientists anticipate the differences in the central Pacific will become more pronounced. “This may manifest as a greater difference in values across the current region, as a broadening region of reduced surface chlorophyll-a concentration, or both, depending on the behavior of the equatorial trade winds,” they said. Reductions in phytoplankton have ripple effects through the marine food web, including in coastal regions. Less food is available for zooplankton , as well as for fish, seabirds, and marine mammals. Peru’s anchovy fisheries have seen profound declines in catch during past El Niños, driven similarly by warmer surface waters, reduced upwelling, and lower phytoplankton abundance. In 2026, Peru’s Ministry of Production repeatedly suspended the fishery to safeguard the country's main fishing resource. Pelicans have been seen venturing into Peruvian ports and urban areas in search of food. Although the disruptions to marine life can be severe, a post-El Niño “chlorophyll rebound,” with higher-than-normal concentrations in the equatorial Pacific, can occur. Research suggests that higher iron concentrations delivered in ocean currents, as well as dust arriving from drier land in parts of Central and South America, help fuel the resurgence—a rebound that doesn’t require a follow-on La Niña. La Niña, which often follows El Niño events, can also produce elevated chlorophyll concentrations. A strong La Niña in 1998–1999 set off a large phytoplankton bloom in the eastern Pacific and a dramatic increase in fish populations. Scientists have new tools available for studying this sort of variability. The PACE mission launched in February 2024, making this the first complete El Niño event for which the satellite will gather global, near-daily hyperspectral measurements. “The scientific community will be able to observe the 2026 El Niño with data across more wavelengths of light than ever before,” Kehrli and Trolley said. To better understand effects on life in the ocean, researchers hope to use PACE data to gauge the responses of specific phytoplankton communities to El Niño. And the possibilities extend beyond the marine realm, the scientists note. PACE’s sensors can measure plant pigment composition on land and clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere, all of which are influenced by El Niño. NASA Earth Observatory images by Michala Garrison, using PACE data from the NASA Ocean Biology Distributed Active Archive Center OB.DAAC and processed by Matthew Kehrli. Story by Lindsey Doermann. Downloads June 2025 JPEG (1.40 MB) June 2026 JPEG (1.37 MB) June 2025 + June 2026 JPEG (2.85 MB) References & Resources The Conversation (2026, June 17) A ‘super’ El Niño has the power to devastate fishing – and leave seals and sea lions starving . Accessed August 6, 2026. Lim, H.-G., et al. (2022) Oceanic and atmospheric drivers of post-El-Niño chlorophyll rebound in the equatorial Pacific . Geophysical Research Letters , 49, e2021GL096113. Ministry of Production (2026, June 11) PRODUCE reinforces conservation measures and suspends anchovy fishing in the North-Central zone . Accessed August 6, 2026. NASA (2016) Ocean Phytoplankton . Accessed August 6, 2026. NASA Earth Observatory (2026, June 18) El Niño Is Underway . Accessed August 6, 2026. NASA Earth Observatory (2025, September 25) El Niño . Accessed August 6, 2026. NASA Earth Observatory (2015, October 29) El Niño Disrupts the Marine Food Web . Accessed August 6, 2026. NASA Scientific Visualization Studio (2016, January 29) 2015 El Niño Disrupts Ocean Chlorophyll . Accessed August 6, 2026. NWS Climate Predication Center (2026, July 9) El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Diagnostic Discussion . Accessed August 6, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. El Niño Is Underway 4 min read Satellite observations of sea surface height indicated that the 2026 event continued to strengthen in early June. Article Sizing Up the Sargassum Belt 6 min read Seaweed composing the Great Atlantic Sargassum Belt hit near-record levels in June 2026, with the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of… Article A Turquoise Tint for the Black Sea 3 min read Phytoplankton added a milky blue hue to the waters of the Black Sea and nearby waterways in spring and summer… Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Earth Observatory 4 min read Olympic Mountain Glory Image of the Day for July 23, 2026 Snow-capped mountains carved by deep river valleys preside over northwestern Washington state. NASA Earth Observatory Jul 23, 2026 Article View more Images of the Day: Jul 22, 2026 Jul 24, 2026 Instruments: ISS — Digital Camera Collections: Astronaut Photography U.S. National Parks Topics: Glaciers & Ice Sheets Surface Water Topography May 6, 2016 Alpine glaciers, wild coastlines, temperate rainforests, and deep river valleys coexist on the Olympic Peninsula in the northwest corner of Washington state. Surrounded by blue waters, peaceful islands, and bustling population centers, its rugged interior remains a relatively remote bastion of wilderness. The Olympic Mountains’ imposing terrain comes into focus in this oblique view of the region, captured by an astronaut aboard the International Space Station. The image is a composite , made of several sequential, overlapping photos fused together into a panorama. Olympic National Park encompasses the peninsula’s mountainous core, along with some stretches of the Pacific coastline. Much of the remaining area is either national forest, state-owned land, or tribal territory. The rock making up the mountains mostly originated beneath the surface of the ocean. From about 55 to 15 million years ago , layers of basalt from undersea eruptions and sand and mud transported seaward by rivers accumulated on the ocean bottom. This material was scraped off the Juan de Fuca plate as it subducted beneath the North American plate, with rock layers crumpling and rising up to 8,000 feet (2,440 meters) above sea level. Tectonic forces continue to push the mountains skyward, but the countervailing force of erosion in this rainy, snowy corner of the country effectively cancels out the uplift. Snow at higher elevations feeds glaciers that carve out underlying rock. Glaciers in the Olympics are retreating and thinning, however, and their numbers are declining. One study tallied 255 glaciers and perennial snowfields in the range in 2015 and found that 35 glaciers and 16 perennial snowfields had disappeared in the preceding 35 years. Other erosion is evidenced by the deep valleys radiating out from the snowy peaks. The Hoh, Queets, and Quinault rivers, draining west into the Pacific Ocean (bottom of the frame), are prominent in this view. These verdant valleys are known for their temperate rainforests , and the ancient forest in the Hoh River valley was once considered among the most naturally quiet places in the U.S., uninterrupted by human-caused noise. Flowing to the north, the Elwha River has a rich natural and human history, including some of the earliest Euro-American exploration of the Olympics. Sponsored by a Seattle newspaper, an expedition from December 1889 to May 1890 crossed the mountain range from north to south, traveling up the Elwha valley and down the Quinault. The party spent several months in the Elwha Valley, their progress hindered by an unusually harsh and snowy winter. In the early 1900s , entrepreneurs saw economic opportunity in the valley. Two dams constructed on the river produced power for local industry. But the structures came with costs, such as blocking the migration of once-abundant trout and salmon to their spawning grounds. In 2011 and 2014, the dams were removed in what was then the largest such project in the U.S., and the process of restoring fish populations, seeding native plant communities, and replenishing sediment along the riverbanks commenced . The mouth of the Elwha forms a delta in the Strait of Juan de Fuca, the waterway bordering the peninsula to the north. The U.S.-Canada border runs through the middle of this 11- to 17-mile-wide (18- to 27-kilometer-wide) channel, with Vancouver Island in British Columbia lying to the north. The strait connects the Pacific Ocean with the Strait of Georgia and Puget Sound. Ship traffic uses the strait to access important West Coast ports, including Seattle and Tacoma, visible along the top-right edge of the image. Astronaut photographs ISS047-E-104138 through ISS047-E-104144 were acquired on May 6, 2016, with a Nikon D4 digital camera using a focal length of 400 millimeters. They are provided by the ISS Crew Earth Observations Facility and the Earth Science and Remote Sensing Unit at NASA Johnson Space Center. The images were taken by a member of the Expedition 47 crew . The images have been cropped and enhanced to improve contrast, and lens artifacts have been removed. The International Space Station Program supports the laboratory as part of the ISS National Lab to help astronauts take pictures of Earth that will be of the greatest value to scientists and the public, and to make those images freely available on the Internet. Additional images taken by astronauts and cosmonauts can be viewed at the NASA/JSC Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth . Story by Lindsey Doermann. Downloads May 6, 2016 JPEG (18.26 MB) References & Resources Fountain, A. G., et al. (2022) Glaciers of the Olympic Mountains, Washington—The past and future 100 years . Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface , 127(4), e2022JF006670. NASA Earth Observatory (2016, February 14) Olympic National Park . Accessed July 22, 2026. NASA Earth Observatory (2012, August 25) Restoration of the Elwha River . Accessed July 22, 2026. National Park Service (2026, July 7) Olympic National Park . Accessed July 22, 2026. Washington State Department of Natural Resources, Olympic Mountains . Accessed July 22, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Colonial National Historical Park 2 min read The colonial communities of “America’s historic triangle” played defining roles in the road to American independence. Article A Turquoise Tint for the Black Sea 3 min read Phytoplankton added a milky blue hue to the waters of the Black Sea and nearby waterways in spring and summer… Article The Forested Floodplains of Congaree National Park 4 min read The meandering Congaree River sustains towering forest ecosystems and fashions oxbow lakes as it shifts across its floodplain. Article Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data

Explore the Universe Universe Coloring Pages We have a whole universe to color! If you've ever dreamed of coloring supernova remnants and merging neutron stars, we have pages for you. Or if you just want to learn a little about what makes a gamma-ray burst, we have that, too. Check out the collections below to find something that will unleash your creativity. Pick where to start your coloring journey! Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Coloring Pages Our Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is designed to see exoplanets and planet-forming disks, complete a statistical census of planetary systems in our galaxy, and settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and infrared astrophysics. Get to know the inspiration for the telescope's name, its key science, and the primary instruments with this set of coloring pages. Download yours here Page 1 of the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope coloring book features the observatory's namesake. NASA Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope Stained Glass Coloring Book Our Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope measures some of the highest-energy bursts of light in the universe to help scientists answer all sorts of questions about some of the most powerful cosmic objects. This set of coloring pages is based on stained glass-inspired depictions of Fermi and its science. Download yours here NASA’s Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope has inspired astronomers and artists alike. These stained-glass-style posters highlight Fermi's exploration of the gamma-ray sky from giant bubbles extending from the Milky Way’s center to neutron stars merging in distant galaxies. NASA/Aurore Simonnet (Sonoma State University) Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory Stained Glass Coloring Book Our Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory is a satellite that studies gamma-ray bursts, the most powerful explosions in the universe, and other cosmic objects and events. It collects data in visible, ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma-ray light. This set of coloring pages is based on stained glass-inspired depictions of Swift and its science. Download yours here One of the Swift satellite coloring pages. NASA/Aurore Simonnet (Sonoma State University) NASA’s Guide to Visiting a Gamma-Ray Burst Coloring Pages Are you looking for a new vacation spot? Perhaps one with spectacular fireworks? While gamma-ray bursts produce brilliant displays of different kinds of light, we can’t recommend visiting one. Before you make up your mind, check out these coloring pages to learn more about gamma-ray bursts. Download yours here The Traveler is looking to visit a gamma-ray burst. We cannot recommend it, but can offer some tips and tricks for staying safe if they must go! NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center NASA’s Guide to Near-Light-Speed Travel Coloring Pages So, you've just put the finishing touches on upgrades to your spaceship, and now it can fly at almost the speed of light. We're not quite sure how you pulled it off, but congratulations! Before you fly off on your next vacation, however, check out these coloring pages to learn more about near-light-speed safety considerations, travel times, and distances between some popular destinations around the universe. Download yours here The Traveler's spaceship has been upgraded to fly at nearly the speed of light. We're not quite sure how, but we have some things to think about before embarking on a trip at such speeds. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center NASA’s Field Guide to Black Holes Coloring Pages Thinking about doing some black hole watching the next time you're on an intergalactic vacation, but you're not quite sure where to start? Well, look no further! We've taken a page from the best nature textbooks, added a dash of fun, and created our very own field guide to black holes. Check out these coloring pages to learn about fancy and giant black holes and their companions. Download yours here The Traveler is consulting our Black Hole Field guide to figure out how to find and identify black holes. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center NASA’s Guide to Black Hole Safety Coloring Pages Have you ever thought about visiting a black hole? We sure hope not! If you're absolutely convinced that a black hole is your ideal vacation spot, though, check out these coloring pages before you blast off to learn more about them and (more importantly) how to stay safe. Download yours here The Traveler would love nothing more than to visit a black hole, so we'll share some tips for a safe journey. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Check out even more coloring resources from the universe! Webb Coloring Activities Our James Webb Space Telescope is not only scientifically stunning but its design is visually and aesthetically inspiring as well. Learn about the structure of Webb while creating your own masterpiece. NuSTAR Coloring Pages Color this art inspired by our NuSTAR satellite and the objects it studies. Exoplanet Travel Bureau Coloring Book Our best idea of what exoplanets might look like comes from artists’ illustrations based on real science, like our Exoplanet Travel Bureau posters. Now you can add your own creative vision to this exoplanet art! Astrobiology Coloring and Drawing Pages Download free coloring and activity pages from the NASA Astrobiology Program! Exploring Space with NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory This printable activity pad in PDF form will take you on a journey into space flight (with paper airplanes) and how we talk to our telescopes in space (see binary code and binary beats). Meet a couple of astronauts, and then learn about exploded stars. Hubble Activity Workbook This five-page activity booklet offers Hubble explorers coloring pages, connect the dots, word find, word jumble, and word decoder. Exoplanet Coloring Book Have fun while learning about Exoplanets, transit science, and our TESS (Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite). Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA For Kids and Students Drawing/Coloring Sheets Drawing/Coloring Sheets For Fun & Learning Citizen Science Projects Through the projects below, sometimes called "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of…

Explore the Universe Preschool Activities with NASA’s Traveler Blast off into some learning fun! Explore big ideas with little learners using these easy, printable activities designed to spark curiosity, build early skills, and introduce preschoolers to the wonders of the cosmos through play-based learning. From counting stars to matching black holes, each activity blends fun with foundational skills. Just print and play! Adventure awaits at the links below Clip Counting with NASA’s Traveler Help your little learners practice early math and develop fine-motor skills with this clip counting activity featuring elements from NASA’s Traveler universe. Download the files here Clip counters are an activity that have youngsters counting the number of pictures and marking the correct answer with a clip. The clip counters pictured here use pictures from NASA’s Traveler universe. NASA/Ashley Balzer Pre-Handwriting Tracers with NASA’s Traveler In this activity, preschoolers will enter NASA’s Traveler universe to trace lines and curves following rockets, asteroids, and rainbows. This activity can help youngsters build fine-motor skills and hand-eye coordination, all while getting their little hands ready for writing. Download the files here Trace the many colorful arcs of cartoon rainbows and more from NASA’s Traveler universe with this downloadable activity sheet. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Matching Game Featuring NASA’s Traveler Explore the galaxy with this space-themed memory match game and help young learners build their focus and visual memory. Download the files here By finding pairs of black holes, stars, space potatoes, and more, young students can build their focus and hone their visual memory with this black hole matching game featuring NASA’s Traveler. NASA/Kelly Ramos-Walker Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA NASA Kids’ Club Drawing/Coloring Sheets Drawing/Coloring Sheets Hubble Online Activities NASA Kids Science

Explore the Universe NASA’s Traveler Learns About the Universe Our Traveler can’t wait to explore the universe! It’s hard not to be caught up in their boundless enthusiasm for all the wondrous sights the cosmos has to offer. Check out their adventures with gamma-ray bursts and near-light-speed travel. In addition to a video, each page offers other related resources like digital wallpapers and downloadable postcards. NASA’s Guide to Visiting a Gamma-Ray Burst Are you looking for a new vacation spot? Perhaps one with spectacular fireworks? While gamma-ray bursts produce brilliant displays of different kinds of light, we can’t recommend visiting one. Before making up your mind, check out this handy video to learn more about what gamma-ray bursts are, how to find them, and safety considerations for watching one. You can also download some GIFs and wallpapers to commemorate the trip. Get Ready for the Trip Our Traveler is ready to embark on a trip to a gamma-ray burst — after they get a few tips and tricks about how to do so safely. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center NASA's Guide to Near-Light-Speed Travel So, you've just put the finishing touches on upgrades to your spaceship, and now it can fly at almost the speed of light. We're not quite sure how you pulled it off, but congratulations! Before you fly off on your next vacation, however, check out this video to learn more about near-light-speed safety considerations, travel times, and distances between some popular destinations around the universe. You can also download shorter clips from the video and printable postcards to send to your friends. Join Their Adventure NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Check Out The Traveler's Exploration of Black Holes! NASA's Black Hole Safety Guide Have you ever thought about visiting a black hole? We sure hope not! However, if you're absolutely convinced that a black hole is your ideal vacation spot, watch this video before you blast off to learn more about them and (more importantly) how to stay safe. NASA's Black Hole Field Guide Thinking about doing some black hole watching the next time you’re on an intergalactic vacation, but you’re not quite sure where to start? Well, look no further! Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Black Holes Hubble Online Activities For Fun & Learning Citizen Science Projects Through the projects below, sometimes called "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of…

6 min read Let’s Bake a Cosmic Cake! NASA Science Editorial Team May 15, 2025 Article To celebrate what would have been the 100th birthday of Dr. Nancy Grace Roman — NASA’s first chief astronomer and the namesake for the agency’s nearly complete Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope — we’re baking a birthday cake! This isn’t your ordinary birthday treat — this cosmic cake represents the contents of our universe and everything the Roman telescope will uncover. NASA's Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Cosmic Cake NASA The outside of our cosmic cake depicts the sky as we see it from Earth—inky black and dotted with sparkling stars. The inside represents the universe as Roman will see it. This three-layer cake charts the mysterious contents of our universe — mostly dark energy, then dark matter, and finally just five percent normal matter. As you cut into our universe cake, out spills a candy explosion symbolizing the wealth of cosmic objects Roman will see. Roman Cosmic Cake Instructions Ingredients: Two boxes of vanilla cake mix and required ingredients Food coloring in three colors Black frosting Edible glitter Yellow sprinkles Nonpareil sprinkle mix Chocolate nonpareil candies Popping candy Miniature creme sandwich cookies Granulated sugar Sour candies Dark chocolate chips Jawbreakers To make our cosmic cake, we first need to account for the universe’s building blocks — normal matter, dark matter, and dark energy. Comprising about five percent of the universe, normal matter is the stuff we see around us every day, from apples to stars in the sky. Outnumbering normal matter by five times, dark matter is an invisible mass that makes up about 25 percent of the universe. Finally, dark energy — a mysterious something accelerating our universe’s expansion — makes up about 68 percent of the cosmos. No one knows what dark matter and dark energy truly are, but we know they exist due to their effects on the universe. Roman will provide clues to these puzzles by 3D mapping matter alongside the expansion of the universe through time. To depict the universe’s building blocks in our cosmic cake, mix the cake batter according to your chosen recipe. Pour one-fourth of the batter into one bowl for the dark matter layer, a little less than three-fourths into another bowl for dark energy, and the remainder into a separate bowl for normal matter. This will give you the quantities of batter for dark energy and dark matter, respectively. Use the remainder to represent normal matter. Color each bowl of batter differently using food coloring, then pour them into three separate cake pans and bake. The different sized layers will have different baking times, so watch them carefully to ensure proper cooking. While our cake bakes, we’ll create the cosmic candy mix — the core of our cake that represents the universe’s objects that Roman will uncover. First, pour yellow sprinkles into a bowl to symbolize the billions of stars Roman will see, including once-hidden stars on the far side of the Milky Way thanks to its ability to see starlight through gas and dust. Roman’s data will also allow scientists to map gas and dust for the most complete picture yet of the Milky Way’s structure and how it births new stars. Add some granulated sugar to the candy mix as gas and dust. Next, add nonpareil sprinkles and chocolate nonpareil candies to symbolize galaxies and galaxy clusters. Roman will capture hundreds of millions of galaxies, precisely measuring their positions, shapes, sizes, and distances. By studying the properties of so many galaxies, scientists will be able to chart dark matter and dark energy’s effects more accurately than ever before. Now, add popping candies as explosive star deaths. Roman will witness tens of thousands of a special kind called type Ia supernovae. By studying how fast type Ia supernovae recede from us at different distances, scientists will trace cosmic expansion to better understand whether and how dark energy has changed throughout time. Supernovae aren’t the only stellar remnants that Roman will see. To represent neutron stars and black holes , add in jawbreakers and dark chocolate chips. Neutron stars are the remnants of massive stars that collapsed to the size of a city, making them the densest things we can directly observe. The densest things we can’t directly observe are black holes. Most black holes are formed when massive stars collapse even further to a theoretical singular point of infinite density. Sometimes, black holes form when neutron stars merge— an epic event that Roman will witness. Roman is also equipped to spot star-sized black holes in the Milky Way and supermassive black holes in other galaxies. Some supermassive black holes lie at the center of active galaxies —the hearts of which emit excessive energy compared to the rest of the galaxy. For these active cores, also spotted by Roman, add sour candies to the mix. Finally, add both whole and crushed miniature creme sandwich cookies to represent distant planets and planets-to-be. Peering into the center of our galaxy, Roman will scan for warped space-time indicating the presence of other worlds. The same set of observations could also reveal more than 100,000 more planets passing in front of other stars. Additionally, the Coronagraph Instrument will directly image both worlds and dusty disks around stars that can eventually form planets. After baking, remove the cake layers from the oven to cool. Cut a hole in the center of the thicker dark matter and dark energy layers. Then, stack these two layers using frosting to secure them. Pour the cosmic candy mix into the cake’s core. Then, place the thin normal matter layer on top, securing it with frosting. Frost the whole cake in black and dust it with edible glitter. Congratulations — your Roman Cosmic Cake is complete! As you look at the cake’s exterior, think of the night sky. As you slice the cake, imagine Roman’s deeper inspection to unveil billions of cosmic objects and clues about our universe’s mysterious building blocks. By Laine Havens NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Share Details Last Updated May 15, 2025 Related Terms Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope For Kids and Students

Roman Roman Knit Pattern [From Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Spacecraft Systems Engineer, Missie Vess] Below you will find the color work pattern for the Roman emblem, the Wide Field Instrument focal plane, seen on figurine Nancy’s knitted blanket in the images below. This color work pattern can be incorporated into a myriad of different knitting projects such as scarves, hats, cowls, pot holders, etc.. The sample seen in figurine Nancy’s blanket, was knit on size 0 needles using a sock-weight yarn, but you can scale up using larger needles and/or thicker gauge yarn. It is also possible to scale up by proportionally increasing the number of stitches and rows in the color pattern. You will see in the pattern that the number of stitches and number of rows for each detector are not equal, despite the detectors in the focal plane array being square. I found that with my knitting tension, I needed more rows than stitches to get close to a square for each detector. Feel free to experiment with your own knitting and find what works for you! (If you do make your own Roman knit products, share them with us via X or Facebook, @NASARoman!) Example of the Roman Space Telescope knitting pattern Get Instructions (PDF) Figurine Nancy’s Blanket Cast on 50 stitches Rows 1 – 10: knit all stitches Row 11: K all stitches (right side) Row 12: K5, P40, K5 (wrong side) Rows 13 – 44: Repeat Rows 11 and 12 Row 45: K10, Work Row 1 of color work pattern, K10 Row 46: K5, P5, Work Row 2 of color work pattern, P5, K5 Rows 47 – 74: Continue with pattern as established in Rows 45 and 46, progressing through color work pattern Rows 3-30 Rows 75 – 108: Repeat Rows 11 and 12* Rows 109 – 118: K all stitches Bind Off all stitches View More Roman Educational Resources

Roman Build a Roman Model Build your own 3D model of the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope! Try your hand as an engineer, and build a paper model of the Roman Space Telescope. Grab your scissors and glue (and safely) start building. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Model Part Number: 1. Outer Barrel Assembly, Integrated Payload Assembly, Spacecraft Bus 2. Deployable Aperture Cover 3. Aperture 4. Solar Panel Support 5. Solar Panel Support 6. Solar Array Sun Shield 7. Launch Vehicle Adapter and Communications Module 8. High Gain Antenna Boom 9. High Gain Antenna Dish 10. High Gain Antenna Dish Get Instructions (PDF) After making your Roman model, feel free to post it to social media and tag us @NASARoman. The model is best for 2nd to 5th grade students, but all ages are welcome to try! View More Roman Educational Resources

Roman The Roman Space Observer Game With the ever-revolving loop of popular trends, retro 8-bit style games have made a big comeback in the gaming industry. Younger generations are now loving games that older generations still enjoy. This game is intended to entertain players across a wide variety of interests and skillsets, all while spreading the word of the Nancy Grace Roman Telescope and the fantastic science it will uncover. Our goal for this game is to inform and inspire players about the amazing cosmic objects in our universe and what Roman may be able to see in a fun and engaging way. Play the Game Scores to Beat! 1207 804 550 838 Vanessa Lloyd NASA Public Affairs Officer Courtney Lee NASA Multimedia Specialist Karl Hille NASA Goddard Tech Communications Lead Glenn Bazemore NASA Roman Telescope Engineer Video Game Glossary: Galaxies : Immense collections of gas, dust, dark matter, and millions or billions of stars and planets, all held together by gravity Webb : Another space observatory that orbits in the same vicinity where Roman will be Supernovae : Star explosions that happen either at the end of a massive star's lifetime or when a white dwarf star siphons enough material from a companion star Exoplanets : Planets beyond our solar system Rogue Exoplanets : Freely floating planets that drift through the galaxy solo, untethered to a star Dark Matter : An invisible form of matter that is only detectable through its gravitational effects on normal matter we can see Black Holes : An object with such powerful gravity that not even light can escape its clutches Game Credits: GMG World Media/NALA Comm Development Team: Ed Henderson, AJ Prakash, Igor Ajranovic Music Credits: "RSTELE THEME" GMG World Media Publishing / Ed Henderson ASCAP – 916151762

Roman Roman Posters and Infographics Roman Space Telescope Observatory 2026 Roman Poster (English) NASA Download Poster 2026 Roman Poster (Spanish) NASA Download Poster Roman Subsystems NASA Download Image Wide Field Instrument Poster NASA, JPL Download Poster Coronagraph Instrument Poster NASA, JPL Download Poster Roman Temperatures NASA [Watch Video] Download Image How does Roman Compare to Other Missions? The Eagle Nebula and Roman's Field of View STSci, NASA Download PDF Roman's Field of View STSci, NASA Download PDF Difference in data volume between the Roman, Webb, and Hubble NASA Download Image Roman vs. Hubble NASA Download Image Hubble, Roman and Webb NASA Download Image Comparison of observatories in the 2020s and their windows into the electromagnetic spectrum STScI Download Image History Space Based Mission STScI Download Image Exoplanet Transits in the Milky Way NASA Download Image Roman vs. Webb : Spectrum Range and Mirrors NASA [Watch Video] Download Image The Science of Roman Roman Space Telescope Redshift NASA, ESA, STScI [ Go to Feature ] Download Image Roman by the Numbers NASA [ Go to Feature ] Download Image Content of the Universe Pie Chart NASA [ Go to Feature ] Download Image Exoplanets : Exploring Exoplanetary Systems UPR Arecibo, ESA/Hubble, NASA Download PDF Roman Surveys Roman's Three Core Surveys Download Image High-Latitude Time-Domain Survey Download Image High-Latitude Wide-Area Survey Download Image Galactic Bulge Time-Domain Survey Download Image Community Surveys Poster Download PDF Galactic Plane Survey Download Image Roman Partner Maps Roman World Partner Map Download Image Roman US Partner Map Download Image Roman Maryland Partner Map Download Image Keep Exploring Brochures and Fact Sheets Scientific Visualizations Technical Graphs and Data Gallery Educational Activity Center

Roman Roman Scientific Visualizations Simulated Galaxy Redshift Cube Sequence The WFI will use a special tiling pattern to perform its high latitude spectroscopic survey. A single image 'footprint' is produced by its 18-detector array and then takes an image slightly offset to cover the small gaps between the individual detectors. It repeats this process eight more times to create a mosaic covering 2.5 square degrees of sky. Download Image Possible High Latitude Survey This illustration compares the relative sizes of the areas of sky covered by two surveys: Roman’s High Latitude Wide Area Survey, outlined in blue, and the largest mosaic led by Hubble, the Cosmological Evolution Survey (COSMOS), shown in red. In current plans, the Roman survey will be more than 1,000 times broader than Hubble’s. Download Image Measuring redshifts of tens of millions of galaxies The spectroscopic component of the High Latitude Wide Area Survey measures redshifts of tens of millions of galaxies via grism spectroscopy using the WFI over at least a 1700 deg 2 region that overlaps the region. Download Image Roman Simulated Image This Roman Simulated Image (1/140th Roman field of view) of center of our Galaxy Download Image Roman’s wide field for studying galaxy clusters This figure illustrates the power of Roman’s wide field for studying galaxy clusters. In 2000 square degrees, the High Latitude Wide Area Survey will observe some 200 Abell clusters and a much larger number of more distant galaxy clusters. Download Image Roman Microlensing Search Space Roman's Field of View is compared to that of the Kepler space telescope. Kepler’s original survey monitored stars at an average distance of around 2,000 light-years where Roman's will find planets up to 26,000 light-years away. Download Image Our neighboring galaxy Andromeda This simulated image showcases the red and infrared light of more than 50 million stars in Andromeda, as they would appear with the Roman Space Telescope. [Watch Video] Download Image Roman simulation of Andromeda A composite figure shows the region of Andromeda covered by the Roman Space Telescope simulation. It would be able to image the main body of Andromeda in just a few pointings, surveying the galaxy nearly 1500 times faster than Hubble. [Watch Video ] Download Image Content of the Universe This pie chart shows rounded values for the three known components of the universe: normal matter, dark matter, and dark energy. [ Watch Video ] Download Image Roman Detector Field of View Roman is a survey telescope, designed to capture vast swaths of sky. But it will do so with revolutionary precision, sensitivity, and depth. The Wide Field Instrument's detectors capture a 4000x4000-pixel image, and together they will take pictures covering 100 times more sky than either Hubble or Webb. [Watch Video] Download Image Roman vs Webb - Spectrum Range and Mirrors Webb is designed to see very redshifted light so that it can study the first, most distant galaxies. The Roman Space Telescope, on the other hand, isn’t trying to see quite as deep into the universe’s history. Roman does have filters to see infrared light, but not as far into the range as Webb because its targets aren’t as redshifted. And Roman’s mirror can be smaller because it isn’t trying to detect such faint objects. [Watch Video] Download Image Roman and Webb Comparison Webb has the exquisite sensitivity and wavelength range to capture detailed images deeper into the universe than ever before. Roman has an incredibly wide field of view to rapidly survey huge areas of sky while still rivaling Hubble and Webb’s resolving power. Webb will tell us about the early universe and Roman will help us understand how it evolved from there. [Watch Video] Download Image Roman and Webb Because both telescopes will operate at the same time, they can work together to discover far more about the cosmos than either could learn alone. When Roman makes an intriguing exoplanet discovery, Webb may be able to follow up soon after, helping scientists learn more. When Roman detects a transient event, like a supernova, somewhere in its broad coverage, Webb can focus in to take deeper measurements. Should Webb find an interesting quirk in a nearby galaxy it is studying, Roman can provide context with thousands of galaxies around it. [Watch Video] Download Image Scientific Visualization Studio The NASA Scientific Visualization Studio works closely with scientists in the creation of visualizations, animations, and images to promote a greater understanding of Earth and Space Science research activities across NASA and the broader academic community. Go to Roman at SVS Keep Exploring Brochures and Fact Sheets Technical Graphs and Data Gallery Posters and Infographics Educational Activity Center

Roman Roman Technical Graphs and Data Gallery A candidate for a galaxy A candidate for a galaxy at z≈9.6, magnified by a factor of ~15 by the foreground cluster MACSJ1149+2223 (z ≈ 0.54). The object was found in an HST survey using the WFC3IR camera (Zheng et al. 2012). This young object is seen when the universe is only about 500 million years old. View JPG Microlensing search area The area around another star that the Roman Space Telescope will search (in blue) for exoplanets compared to Kepler's search area. View JPG Roman's Forward Optical Assembly The main pieces of Roman's Forward Optical Assembly. Credit: NASA View PNG Microlensing Penny Plot Credit: NASA View JPG Sensitivity Roman vs. LSST and Euclid Credit: NASA View JPG The Expanding Universe Credit: NASA View JPG Coronagraph sensitivity The Roman Coronagraph sensitivity to detecting planets as a function of planet-to-star flux ratio and separation from the parent star. The Roman Coronagraph provides a 100 to 1000 times improvement over existing and planned facilities. [The source code and input data for this plot are maintained here.] Credit: NASA View PNG High-Latitude Spectroscopic Survey figure View PNG Roman Space Telescope science Credit: NASA View JPG Roman Effective Area Credit: NASA View JPG Roman Microlensing Credit: NASA View JPG Grawp comprison Credit: NASA View JPG Dark energy Credit: NASA View JPG Layout of a nominal supernova survey region ach sector in this concept consists of 16 tiles, arranged in three columns of (5,6,5) tiles per column. The resulting sector footprint, when rotated through 12 orients spaced at 30 degree intervals throughout the year, fully covers a 5 deg 2 area (red circle) and partially covers an additional 3 deg 2 area (annulus between red and blue circles). [Credit: Dan Scolnic, Charles Baltay]. View PNG Notional placement of the Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey fields The upper image shows the inner half of our Milky Way galaxy in false color, with the Galactic Bulge at the center. Dark patches are regions where the background starlight is obscured by interstellar dust. The lower image is a 6x6 degree region near the Galactic center, where the color-bar indicates the amount of dust extinction. The locations of seven Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey WFI fields shown in the inset optimizes a combination of high stellar density and comparatively low dust extinction, to maximize the yield of microlensing events. View PNG Roman microlensing technique Roman will search for exoplanets using the microlensing technique displayed above. As a lens star moves across the line of sight of the telescope, an exoplanet will magnify a background star's signal. Credit: NASA View PNG Microlensing Events Schematic illustration of how the Roman Space Telescope discovers signals caused by planetary companions in primary microlensing events, and how planet parameters can be extracted from these signals. The left panel shows a simulated primary microlensing event, containing a planetary deviation from an Earth-mass companion to the primary lens. The offset of the deviation from the peak of the primary event, when combined with the primary event parameters, is related to the projected separation of the planet. The right panel shows an enlargement of the planetary perturbation. The width and precise shape of the planetary deviation yield the mass of the companion relative to that of the primary host lens. View JPG Keep Exploring Brochures and Fact Sheets Scientific Visualizations Posters and Infographics Educational Activity Center

Roman Roman Brochures and Fact Sheets Roman Press Kit NASA Download PDF Roman Quick Facts NASA Download PDF Roman Space Telescope Brochure NASA Download PDF Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope "Beauty Pass" Lithograph NASA Download PDF "Dark Energy" Lithograph NASA Download PDF "Cosmology with Roman" Fact Sheet STSci Download PDF "Galaxies by the Millions" Fact Sheet STSci Download PDF "Stars by the Billions" Fact Sheet STSci Download PDF "Mission, Operations, and User Tools" Fact Sheet STSci Download PDF Keep Exploring Posters and Infographics Scientific Visualizations Technical Graphs and Data Gallery Educational Activity Center

Roman Baryon Acoustic Oscillations Roman will detect vestiges of sound waves that once rippled through the primordial cosmic sea. Roman will detect vestiges of sound waves, called baryon acoustic oscillations (BAOs), that once rippled through the primordial cosmic sea. The mission’s observations could extend these measurements into an unprobed epoch, which will help astronomers trace the evolution of the universe. Animation illustrating the baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) technique. NASA Goddard's Scientific Visualization Studio For most of its first half-million years, the universe looked extremely different than it does today. Instead of being speckled with stars and galaxies, the cosmos was filled with a sea of plasma – charged particles – that formed a dense, almost uniform fluid. There were tiny fluctuations of about one part in 100,000. What few variations there were took the form of slightly denser kernels of matter, like a single ounce of cinnamon sprinkled into about 13,000 cups of cookie dough. Since the clumps had more mass, their gravity attracted additional material. It was so hot that particles couldn’t stick together when they collided – they just bounced off each other. Alternating between the pull of gravity and this repelling effect created waves of pressure – sound – that propagated through the plasma. Over time, the universe cooled and particles combined to form neutral atoms. Because the particles stopped repelling each other, the waves ceased. Their traces, however, still linger, etched on the cosmos. When atoms formed, the ripples essentially froze in place, carrying within them a bit more matter than the average across the universe. With the repulsive pressure of the plasma gone, gravity became the dominant force. Over the course of hundreds of millions of years, clumps from the plasma that once filled the universe slurped up more material to become stars. Their mutual gravity pulled stars together into groups, ultimately forming the galaxies we see today. And slightly more galaxies formed along the ripples than elsewhere. While the waves no longer propagated, the frozen ripples stretched as the universe expanded, increasing the distance between galaxies. By looking at how galaxies are spread out in different cosmic epochs, we can explore how the universe has expanded over time. Scientists have noticed a pattern in the way galaxies cluster together from measurements of the nearby universe. For any galaxy today, we are more likely to find another galaxy about 500 million light-years away than slightly nearer or farther. But looking farther out into space, to earlier cosmic times, means that this distance – the vestige of the frozen BAO ripples – will decrease. Dark Energy Expansion Graph : Animation illustrating the changing rate of expansion due to dark energy. NASA Goddard's Scientific Visualization Studio Roman will extend previous research by mapping the expansion of the universe to unprecedented detail. Studies show that Roman’s surveys will be able to probe for BAO remnants five times farther than originally planned, back to when the universe was only about 600 million years old – just 4% of its current age. Learning more about the way the cosmos has expanded over time will allow scientists to explore dark energy – a mysterious pressure that is accelerating the expansion of the universe. Roman is optimized to survey the cosmos for BAO impressions across the middle of its current age because that’s when scientists think dark energy transitioned from being a minor contributor to the contents of the universe to the most dominant force. But some theories hypothesize a bout of dark energy activity when the universe was much younger. Peering farther into the universe’s past will add pieces to the puzzle and help astronomers decipher how dark energy has shaped the cosmos over time. Animation illustrating the High Latitude Wide Area Survey technique. NASA Goddard's Scientific Visualization Studio The High Latitude Wide Area Survey will allow astronomers to see how the distribution of galaxies has changed, revealing how dark energy has evolved over cosmic time. A key technique to study dark energy is a measurement called “redshift.” Because space itself is expanding, the farther we look, the faster galaxies are moving away from us. This results in a measurable shift in an object’s light toward redder colors. This redshift indicates how fast the expanding universe is carrying galaxies away from us. If we can also figure out a galaxy’s distance by other methods, we can use both pieces of information to measure how the universe expanded while the galaxy’s light was traveling to us. Roman will map out the positions and distances of millions of galaxies. This will allow astronomers to see how the distribution of galaxies has changed, revealing how dark energy has evolved over cosmic time. Featured Story NASA’s Roman Space Telescope to Uncover Echoes of the Universe’s Creation NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will detect vestiges of sound waves that once rippled through the primordial cosmic sea.… Read the Story ROMAN SCIENCE Roman's Dark Energy Roman will help illuminate the dark energy puzzle by using multiple methods to explore how the universe has evolved throughout cosmic history. Find Out More

Roman Type Ia Supernovae Roman will use type Ia supernovae to measure cosmic distances, which will help us understand how the universe has expanded over time. Roman will see thousands of exploding stars called supernovae across vast stretches of time and space. Using these observations, astronomers aim to shine a light on several cosmic mysteries – primarily dark energy . Roman will use type Ia supernovae to measure cosmic distances, which will help us understand how the universe has expanded over time. NASA Goddard's Scientific Visualization Studio Roman’s supernova survey will help clear up clashing measurements of how fast the universe is currently expanding, and even provide a new way to probe the distribution of dark matter , which is detectable only through its gravitational effects. One of the mission’s primary science goals involves using supernovae to help pin down the nature of dark energy – the unexplained cosmic pressure that’s speeding up the expansion of the universe. Roman will use multiple methods to investigate dark energy. One involves surveying the sky for a special type of exploding star, called a type Ia supernova. Many supernovae occur when massive stars run out of fuel, rapidly collapse under their own weight, and then explode because of strong shock waves that propel out of their interiors. These supernovae occur about once every 50 years in our Milky Way galaxy. But evidence shows that type Ia supernovae originate from some binary star systems that contain at least one white dwarf – the small, hot core remnant of a Sun-like star. Type Ia supernovae are much rarer, happening roughly once every 500 years in the Milky Way. In some cases, the dwarf may siphon material from its companion. This ultimately triggers a runaway reaction that detonates the thief once it reaches a specific point where it has gained so much mass that it becomes unstable. Astronomers have also found evidence supporting another scenario, involving two white dwarfs that spiral toward each other until they merge. If their combined mass is high enough that it leads to instability, they, too, may produce a type Ia supernova. These explosions peak at a similar, known intrinsic brightness, making type Ia supernovae so-called standard candles – objects or events that emit a specific amount of light, allowing scientists to find their distance with a straightforward formula. Because of this, astronomers can determine how far away the supernovae are by simply measuring how bright they appear. The animation above shows how Roman will measure dark energy with exploding stars called type Ia supernovae. These blasts are caused by the total destruction of a white dwarf star and each one emits similar amounts of light. But the farther away they are, the fainter the explosions look. By measuring how bright type Ia supernovae appear to be, we have a way to measure their distances. It was by comparing supernovae redshifts to their apparent brightness that astronomers discovered dark energy. These studies showed that explosions at greater redshifts were dimmer than they should be in any model where the expansion of the universe was not speeding up. NASA Goddard's Scientific Visualization Studio Astronomers will also use Roman to study the light of these supernovae to find out how quickly they appear to be moving away from us. By comparing how fast they’re receding at different distances, scientists will trace cosmic expansion over time. This will help us understand whether and how dark energy has changed throughout the history of the universe. Previous type Ia supernova surveys have concentrated on the relatively nearby universe, largely due to instrument limitations. Roman’s infrared vision, gigantic field of view, and exquisite sensitivity will dramatically extend the search, pulling the cosmic curtains far enough aside to allow astronomers to spot thousands of distant type Ia supernovae. Roman will study dark energy’s influence in detail over more than half of the universe’s history, when it was between about 4 and 12 billion years old. Exploring this relatively unprobed region will help scientists add crucial pieces to the dark energy puzzle. Featured Story NASA’s Roman Mission to Probe Cosmic Secrets Using Exploding Stars NASA’s upcoming Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will see thousands of exploding stars called supernovae across vast stretches of time… Read the Story ROMAN SCIENCE Roman's Dark Energy Roman will help illuminate the dark energy puzzle by using multiple methods to explore how the universe has evolved throughout cosmic history. Find Out More

Roman Weak Lensing Roman will study warped space-time to illuminate the universe’s dark side Roman will study how the universe’s web of matter has evolved by measuring how gravity subtly bends the path of light across vast distances—a phenomenon called gravitational lensing. This effect occurs because anything that has mass warps space-time, the underlying fabric of the universe. Extremely massive things like clusters of galaxies warp space-time so much that they can create strong gravitational lensing by bending the path light travels when it passes by them. That can smear or duplicate images of distant galaxies, or if the alignment is just right it can magnify them like a natural telescope. Roman will be sensitive enough to study weak lensing, the same effect on a much smaller scale. The observations will help scientists create a far more detailed map of the distribution of matter, both seen and unseen, throughout the universe. This simulation shows the type of science astronomers will be able to do with future observations from NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. The sequence demonstrates how the gravity of intervening galaxy clusters and dark matter can distort the light from farther objects, warping their appearance. More intervening material creates stronger distortions. By analyzing these features, astronomers can study elusive dark matter, which can only be measured indirectly through its gravitational effects on visible matter. As a bonus, the distortion acts like a telescope, enabling observations of extremely distant galaxies. Simulations like this one help astronomers understand what Roman’s future observations could tell us about the universe, and provide useful data to validate data analysis techniques. Caltech/IPAC/R. Hurt Dark Matter This strange substance is perplexing because it’s invisible and only interacts with normal matter gravitationally; we can only see dark matter indirectly by watching how it affects things we can see. Roman’s weak lensing measurements will reveal the presence of clumps of dark matter that create distortions that are much too subtle to see in any single galaxy. Astronomers need a wide-eyed telescope like Roman to “see” where dark matter is via tiny changes it creates in the measured shapes of hundreds of millions of galaxies. By mapping both normal and dark matter across an enormous swath of cosmic history, Roman will reveal how structures have grown under gravity from shortly after the big bang to today. Mapping dark matter more precisely than ever before could help astronomers figure out what it’s made of. This video dissolves between the entire collection of redshift cubes in 55 seconds. As the universe expands, the density of galaxies within each cube decreases, from 528,000 in the first cube to 80 in the last. Each cube is about 100 million light-years across. Galaxies assembled along vast strands of gas separated by large voids, a foam-like structure echoed in the present-day universe on large cosmic scales. NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center/F. Reddy and Z. Zhai, Y. Wang (IPAC) and A. Benson (Carnegie Observatories) Dark Energy Creating a 3D matter map will also aid the dark energy hunt because dark matter acts as drag, countering the universe’s expansion; its gravity pulls, and dark energy pushes. Astronomers will study how each force influenced cosmic evolution, which could help them figure out how and why dark energy is speeding up the universe’s expansion. Weak lensing also reveals how the stretching of space-time influences the paths that light travels. Roman’s observations will offer clues about dark energy’s strength and behavior both through how it influences cosmic growth and leaves an imprint on the universe’s geometry. Since weak lensing measures how structure evolves over time, it provides insights that are highly complementary to other methods, like exploding stars and ancient cosmic sound waves . Together, these techniques will offer a more complete picture of cosmic expansion and dark energy’s impact. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This animation illustrates how the universe's expansion rate has changed over cosmic time. NASA Goddard's Scientific Visualization Studio Telescopic Teamwork Combining Roman’s observations with those from other key telescopes will help astronomers learn much more than they could from any of them individually. For example, Roman and ESA’s Euclid space telescope will conduct weak lensing observations in different types of light—visible wavelengths for Euclid and infrared wavelengths for Roman. Either approach introduces small errors due to inherent detector properties that astronomers need to correct for, so each mission can use the other’s data to cross-check their corrections. Pairing Roman data with observations from the ground-based Vera C. Rubin Observatory will allow scientists to try to detect the same objects in both sets of images. That’s important because ground-based observations aren’t always sharp enough to distinguish multiple, close sources as separate objects. Sometimes they blur together, which makes weak lensing effects much harder to see. By comparing Roman and Rubin images, scientists may be able to “deblend” objects Rubin sees and inch closer to achieving Roman-like quality over Rubin’s much greater sky coverage. A key element in using weak lensing to study dark energy is measuring not just the shape but also the distance to each galaxy, since that influences the degree of warping. It’s sort of like how the magnification changes if you hold a magnifying glass over a page and move it up and down. Combining Rubin’s visible observations with Roman’s infrared measurements will give astronomers very accurate distance measurements, helping them correctly interpret weak lensing signals. Related Stories Article 7 Min Read Core Survey by NASA’s Roman Mission Will Unveil Universe’s Dark Side Article 5 Min Read Millions of Galaxies Emerge in New Simulated Images From NASA’s Roman 5 Min Read How NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Rewind the Universe Article 7 Min Read NASA’s Roman and ESA’s Euclid Will Team Up To Investigate Dark Energy Article 8 Min Read NASA’s Roman Mission Will Test Competing Cosmic Acceleration Theories Article

Exoplanet Atmosphere Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Decagon on Saturn’s South Pole (Color) 1 min read Recent NASA Hubble Space Telescope images show the gas giant Saturn and its southern pole, where astronomers have discovered a… Sep 2, 2026 Image Decagon on Saturn’s South Pole (Single Filter) 1 min read A single filter from NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope distinctly shows a 10-sided wave encircling Saturn’s south pole, labeled “decagon”.An “X”… Sep 2, 2026 Image NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars 5 min read Pandora, NASA’s newest exoplanet mission and the first satellite to launch through the agency’s Astrophysics Pioneers program, is now making… Aug 25, 2026 Article NASA’s Webb Studies How Planet Survived Death of its Star 6 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope is giving us new insight into the far-future of solar systems like our own, as… Jul 1, 2026 Article Exoplanet WD 1856 b (Transmission Spectrum) 1 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope measured the constituents of exoplanet WD 1856 b as it passed in front of its… Jul 1, 2026 Image NASA’s Roman Mission Preps to Unveil New Populations of Faraway Worlds 6 min read NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is poised to make a major advance in the hunt for worlds outside our… May 28, 2026 Article Helio and You: Seasons on Earth, Mars, and Beyond 10 min read Earth has four seasons: spring, summer, fall, and winter. Other planets can experience seasons, too, but they might be wildly… May 15, 2026 Topic NASA Webb, Hubble Share Most Comprehensive View of Saturn to Date 6 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope and Hubble Space Telescope have teamed up to capture new views of Saturn, revealing the… Mar 25, 2026 Article Saturn (Webb NIRCam and Hubble WFC3/UVIS) 1 min read Complementary views of Saturn from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope and Hubble Space Telescope show a dynamic planet with atmospheric… Mar 25, 2026 Image News & Articles See All News Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars Article 6 Min Read NASA’s Webb Studies How Planet Survived Death of its Star Article 6 Min Read NASA Webb, Hubble Share Most Comprehensive View of Saturn to Date Article 4 Min Read Discovery Alert: An Ice-Cold Earth? Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

Exoplanet Science Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Roman Series: Why NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Make Unexpected Discoveries 22 min read Take a deep dive into the science of NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope with Julie McEnery, Roman's senior project… Aug 27, 2026 NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars 5 min read Pandora, NASA’s newest exoplanet mission and the first satellite to launch through the agency’s Astrophysics Pioneers program, is now making… Aug 25, 2026 Article Roman Series: Jupiters Around Other Suns 53 min read NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is on a quest to discover planets outside our solar system. NASA scientists Bertrand… Aug 18, 2026 Roman Series: NASA’s New View of the Dark Universe 33 min read Meet NASA’s newest space telescope: Roman. With similar resolution to Hubble but a field of view 100 times larger, the… Aug 11, 2026 Launching Soon: NASA’s Roman Space Telescope 5 min read NASA is about to launch the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, which will change the way we see the universe… Aug 4, 2026 NASA’s TESS Mission Reveals the “Puffiest” Planets Ever Found 3 min read NASA has revealed two new “super-puff” planets, giant worlds so light that their density is comparable to cotton candy. Scientists… Jun 24, 2026 Article NASA’s Planet-Hunting TESS Reveals Dazzling Night Sky 3 min read NASA’s TESS has released its most complete view of the starry sky to date May 13, 2026 Article New Ultra-Black Coating Could Enable the Search for Life on Exoplanets 7 min read A recently developed ultra-black coating not only efficiently absorbs light, but is also extremely thin and durable, enabling its potential… May 12, 2026 Article For NASA’s TESS, Stellar Eclipses Shed Light on Possible New Worlds 4 min read A study of NASA’s TESS (Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite) data on stellar pairs undergoing mutual eclipses has uncovered more than… May 4, 2026 Article News & Articles See All News Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Pandora Mission Begins Study of Exoplanets, Host Stars Article 3 Min Read NASA’s TESS Mission Reveals the “Puffiest” Planets Ever Found Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Planet-Hunting TESS Reveals Dazzling Night Sky Article 7 Min Read New Ultra-Black Coating Could Enable the Search for Life on Exoplanets Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

Marshall Astrophysics Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending NASA’s Chandra Unveils Mysterious X-Ray Objects 5 min read Using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, scientists have discovered a new class of objects behaving unlike any they have seen before.… Sep 9, 2026 Article Galactic Gems Glisten in New Gallery From NASA’s Chandra 4 min read Galaxies are like cosmic gems, each with characteristics including size and shape that make them distinct. A new gallery released… Aug 25, 2026 Article NASA Telescopes Create Colorful ‘Craft’ From Nearby Nebula 4 min read Like a collage made of layered sheets of colored cellophane, a vibrant new image layers observations of a famous star-forming… Aug 11, 2026 Article NASA’s IXPE May Have Proven 90-Year-Old Theory 4 min read A first-of-its-kind measurement of a magnetar may have captured empty space behaving in a way physicists have predicted for 90… Aug 5, 2026 Article NASA Space Telescope Maps Magnetic Fields of ‘Lighthouse’ Pulsar 4 min read For the first time, scientists have used NASA’s IXPE (Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer) to directly measure the magnetic fields of… Jul 9, 2026 Article NASA’s Chandra Examines Milky Way at Arms’ Length 5 min read A new result using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory shows that the outer spiral arms in the Milky Way galaxy may… Jul 1, 2026 Article NASA’s Chandra Reveals ‘Red, White, Blue’ Universe for US 250th 7 min read In celebration of the 250th birthday of the United States, NASA has unveiled four cosmic images from its Chandra X-ray… Jun 30, 2026 Article NASA’s Chandra Finds Unexpected Fireworks in Aftermath of Stellar Explosions 6 min read The aftermath of a supernova, a stellar explosion, is usually a slowly fading cloud of hot gas. So when astronomers… Jun 15, 2026 Article NASA’s Chandra Discovers Possible Supernova Remnant in Galactic Center 5 min read Using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, astronomers may have found a supernova remnant in an intriguing neighborhood in the… Jun 11, 2026 Article News & Articles See All News Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Chandra Unveils Mysterious X-Ray Objects Article 4 Min Read Galactic Gems Glisten in New Gallery From NASA’s Chandra Article 4 Min Read NASA Telescopes Create Colorful ‘Craft’ From Nearby Nebula Article 4 Min Read NASA’s IXPE May Have Proven 90-Year-Old Theory Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

Nebulae Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending NASA’s Webb Reveals Dynamic Panorama of Star Formation 5 min read This starry view of the nearby star-forming region IC 348 is one of the largest images released to date from… Sep 15, 2026 Article IC 348 Collage 1 min read This collage features a collection of insets from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s image of star-forming region IC 348: embedded… Sep 15, 2026 Image IC 348 (NIRCam Image) 1 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope recently observed IC 348, a star-forming region just 1,000 light-years away from Earth. Webb’s sharp… Sep 15, 2026 Image Superbubble in the Large Magellanic Cloud 1 min read NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope captures a photogenic nebula, N44, in the Large Magellanic Cloud in this Sept. 3, 2026, image.… Sep 8, 2026 Image Article NASA’s Hubble Spies Superbubble Scene 3 min read This Hubble Space Telescope image features a sprawling cosmic vista called N44. Sep 3, 2026 Article NASA’s Swift Restarts Science Observations 2 min read NASA’s Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory has resumed operating two of its three science instruments, following the scaling back of a… Aug 28, 2026 Blog Webb Opens Treasure Chest 1 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope captured this Aug. 6, 2026, infrared image of part of the Carina Nebula, a star-forming… Aug 21, 2026 Image Article Colorful Collage of Tarantula Nebula 1 min read Data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope, and NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope combine to reveal a… Aug 17, 2026 Image Article Lion Nebula Roars in Webb’s Sights 1 min read Observing across the starry “plains” of space, NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has taken new images of NGC 2392, nicknamed… Aug 11, 2026 Image Article News & Articles See All News Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Webb Reveals Dynamic Panorama of Star Formation Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Spies Superbubble Scene Article 4 Min Read NASA Telescopes Create Colorful ‘Craft’ From Nearby Nebula Article 4 Min Read Lion Nebula Roars to Life With NASA’s Webb Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

4 Min Read NASA Space Telescope Maps Magnetic Fields of ‘Lighthouse’ Pulsar Michael Allen Jul 09, 2026 Article Contents Fast facts More about IXPE For the first time, scientists have used NASA’s IXPE (Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer) to directly measure the magnetic fields of PSR J1101−6101, a pulsar located within what is often referred to as the Lighthouse Nebula. The results provide new insight into the structure of some of the most extreme objects in the cosmos, as NASA continues to explore the secrets of how the universe works. A paper describing the results published Thursday in the Astrophysical Journal. X-ray: Chandra: NASA/CXC/Stanford Univ./J.T. Dinsmore et al.; IXPE: NASA/MSFC/J.T. Dinsmore et al., Radio: CSIRO/ATNF/ATCA; Optical: 2MASS/UMass/IPAC-Caltech/NASA/NSF; Image processing: NASA/CXC/SAO/L. Frattare Fast facts A pulsar is a type of neutron star with a strong magnetic field that spins incredibly fast. The pulsar at the center of the Lighthouse Nebula is rotating 16 times per second. Neutron stars are the leftover cores of massive stars, formed at the end of their life cycles, that possess more mass than the Sun. They are condensed down to the size of a city, making them natural laboratories for studying extreme physics. Polarization is a property of light that describes the direction of its electric field vibrations. The polarization degree is a measurement of how aligned those vibrations are with each other. In June 2025, IXPE spent nearly 18 days focused on the Lighthouse Nebula. Astronomers studied two narrow X-ray offshoots extending from the pulsar to better understand how electrons at nearly the speed of light interact with this energetic system. The longer offshoot is known as the “filament,” and the shorter one is the “trail.” When high-energy particles from the pulsar collide with the gas of interstellar space, they form a bow shock, like the bow wave formed at the front of a speeding boat. Most particles become trapped behind this bow shock, forming the turbulent trail behind the pulsar. Researchers have suspected since 2008 that the highest-energy particles escape through this bow shock into interstellar space, flowing along the galaxy’s magnetic field lines to create the nebula’s long, thin filament. “We wanted to test that theory,” said Jack Dinsmore, graduate student at Stanford University, who led the study. “The ‘smoking gun’ would come by measuring the polarization of the light, which indicates the magnetic field direction. If the magnetic field points along the filament, that confirms that the filament’s particles are flowing along the field.” One challenge with these measurements is that the Lighthouse Nebula is relatively faint. To address this, IXPE scientists developed advanced analysis methods that use every bit of data, avoiding simplifying steps that could limit information. With these new tools and the new observations of the Lighthouse, the science team successfully measured the filament’s polarization. These techniques also gave a polarization measurement of the trail, and the pulsar’s emission signal. Their analysis confirmed with more than 99% confidence that the magnetic field does indeed align with the particles’ flow. While the parallel direction confirms models for the particle’s motion, the polarization degree was high enough to raise new questions. “Many of the models for filaments assume strong magnetic turbulence,” said Roger Romani, a Stanford University professor who co-authored this paper. “The high polarization degree we measured indicates lower turbulence than such models require.” The IXPE observations also showed that the magnetic field responsible for X-ray emission had to be parallel to the trail. However, the authors collected radio frequency observations showing a magnetic field pointing almost exactly perpendicular. “The striking divergence in magnetic field orientations observed between radio and X-ray wavelengths provides compelling evidence for the highly structured nature of these objects,” said Niccolò Bucciantini of the Italian National Institute for Astrophysics and co-author of the study. “This marks the first clear indication that particles of different energies occupy distinct regions within the system, hinting at the presence of multiple, and potentially very different, acceleration mechanisms at work.” More about IXPE The IXPE mission, which continues to provide unprecedented data enabling groundbreaking discoveries about celestial objects across the universe, is a joint NASA and Italian Space Agency mission with partners and science collaborators in 12 countries. It is led by NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, and BAE Systems, Inc. manages spacecraft operations together with the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics in Boulder. Learn more about IXPE’s ongoing mission here: https://www.nasa.gov/ixpe About the Author Michael Allen Share Details Last Updated Jul 22, 2026 Editor Lee Mohon Contact Joel Wallace joel.w.wallace@nasa.gov Location Marshall Space Flight Center Related Terms IXPE (Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer) Astrophysics Chandra X-Ray Observatory Marshall Astrophysics Marshall Space Flight Center Nebulae Pulsars The Universe Explore More 3 min read NASA’s IXPE Measures White Dwarf Star for First Time By Michael Allen For the first time, scientists have used NASA’s IXPE (Imaging X-ray Polarimetry… Article 9 months ago 4 min read NASA’s IXPE Obtains First X-ray Polarization Measurement of Magnetar Outburst What happens when the universe’s most magnetic object shines with the power of 1,000 Suns… Article 1 year ago 8 min read NASA Telescopes Tune Into a Black Hole Prelude, Fugue NASA released three new pieces of cosmic sound Thursday that are associated with the densest… Article 1 year ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA IXPE The Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer (IXPE) is NASA’s first mission to study the polarization of X-rays. Chandra X-ray Observatory Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the…

5 min read NASA’s Chandra Examines Milky Way at Arms’ Length Lee Mohon Jul 01, 2026 Article To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This sequence begins with an artist’s concept showing the Milky Way galaxy as seen from above, with the estimated positions of spiral arms based on previous data. Next is an updated artist’s concept of the Milky Way, where the positions of the two spiral arms most distant from the center of the galaxy have been adjusted based on newly processed X-ray data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton. Both arms may be more distant than previously thought. NASA/CXC/A. Hobart A new result using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory shows that the outer spiral arms in the Milky Way galaxy may reach wider than previously thought. This finding may lead astronomers to adjust their understanding of our home galaxy’s structure. A team of astronomers made this discovery by making precise measurements of distances to dust clouds in the Milky Way’s spiral arms using data from both NASA’s Chandra and XMM-Newton, an ESA (European Space Agency) mission with NASA contributions. The results are described in a new paper published Wednesday in the Astronomy & Astrophysics journal. The researchers determined the distances by studying rings around gamma-ray bursts, some of the brightest bursts of light in the universe, which arise from the collapse of massive stars or the merger of neutron stars. They are located at enormous distances, well beyond the confines of our galaxy. An artist’s concept showing the Milky Way galaxy as seen from above, with the estimated positions of spiral arms based on previous data, in blue. Overlaid on this is an updated view of the Milky Way showing different positions for the two outermost spiral arms, shown in red and bordered by dashed lines. Both arms may be more distant than previously thought, based on newly processed X-ray data from Chandra and XMM. NASA/CXC/SAO/M.Weiss This distance measurement technique capitalized on the phenomenon of light echoes, where the light from the gamma-ray burst bounced off dust clouds in the spiral arms. The diameters of the rings in X-rays give the distances to Earth, with larger rings being generated by dust clouds closer to us. “This is a very direct way – relying only on geometry – to precisely measure distances to the Milky Way’s spiral arms,” said Beatrice Vaia, who led the study while a PhD student in a joint program between Scuola Universitaria Superiore IUSS Pavia and University of Trento in Italy. “Most other methods rely on assumptions about how the Milky Way rotates, which become increasingly uncertain in the outer regions of our galaxy." Despite a century of awareness of the Milky Way’s spiral arms, astronomers are still working toward precise characterization of its arms because of Earth’s position within one. Dust and gas also block the view to other arms. The researchers used three different gamma-ray bursts to determine the distances to three spiral arms in the Milky Way. In order of increasing distances from the Galactic Center, they are the Perseus, the Outer, and the Outer Scutum-Centaurus arms. Along the direction of one of the bursts, they found that both the Outer and Outer Scutum-Centaurus arms are about 10% more distant than astronomers previously thought. “The differences are small, but any revision of these distances is important because they are so fundamental for understanding our galaxy,” said co-author Ilaria Fornasiero, who was a PhD student in the same program as the leading author. “For example, this could mean that astronomers have to revise estimates of the mass of the galaxy, because that affects how wide the arms stretch.” The images include X-ray data from Chandra and optical data from Pan-STARRS. The composite image shows X-ray rings generated by a gamma-ray burst (GRB), a bright X-ray source located outside our galaxy. In a phenomenon called light echoes, the X-rays from the GRB bounced off dust clouds in the spiral arms of our galaxy. The diameters of the rings in the Chandra data give the distances of the dust clouds to Earth, with larger rings being generated by dust clouds closer to us. The GRB is located at the center of the circles defining the rings, to the left of the X-ray data outlined by the white square. X-ray: NASA/CXC/INAF/B. Vaia et al.; Optical: Pan-STARRS; Image processing: NASA/CXC/SAO/N.Wolk & P.Edmonds The team also used their data to estimate that the dust cloud in the most distant arm is about 3,500 light-years wide. These findings show that their measurements apply to the full thickness of the spiral arm, rather than a random, isolated dust cloud that may not fully be representative of the arm’s location. While this technique provided major improvements in accuracy according to the researchers, it may be difficult to use it for further measurements because bright gamma-ray bursts that are visible through the plane of the galaxy are rare. “We’re relying on the universe to provide us with these events, and so far, over 25 years, we’ve only found a handful that we can use,” said co-author Andrea Tiengo of Scuola Universitaria Superiore IUSS Pavia. “That said, we will continue to be on the lookout for more.” NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, manages the Chandra program. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory's Chandra X-ray Center controls science operations from Cambridge, Massachusetts, and flight operations from Burlington, Massachusetts. Read more from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory To learn more about Chandra, visit: https://nasa.gov/chandra To learn more about NASA’s Chandra mission, visit: https://nasa.gov/chandra Visual Description This release features a short video and a series of images, all related to an updated understanding of our home galaxy's structure. By studying rings of X-ray light echoes, researchers now believe that two of the Milky Way's spiral arms may be more distant from the center of the galaxy than previously thought. The updated understanding of the structure of the Milky Way is highlighted in a short video, which compares two artist concept images. In both images, our spiral Milky Way galaxy is shown face-on. It has a bright white core with several arms that spiral out from the center, like long thin clouds corkscrewing counterclockwise. The two longest arms make a full rotation of the spiral galaxy, and curve all the way around to the upper right of the images. The first image in the video shows the previous understanding of the Milky Way. Here, the two longest arms are curled around the core in a fairly tight spiral. In the second image, which represents the updated understanding, the two longest arms are more loosely spiraled. Visually, this means there is more open space between the curving arms, which are further away from the bright galaxy core. The video fades back and forth between the two artist concept images to illustrate the structural differences between the two understandings. These findings are further shown by a static image which overlays the new understanding on top of the earlier understanding. In this artist's concept illustration, dotted lines and different colors are used to differentiate between the two. A team of astronomers made this discovery by studying gamma-ray bursts that bounce off of dust clouds in the galaxy's spiral arms. The resulting rings of X-rays, known as light echoes, were detected and mapped by NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA's XMM-Newton. In a supplemental data image, the light echoes resemble concentric arches of neon blue dots trailing across a speckled sky. Identifying the position of the Milky Way's spiral arms through X-ray light echoes has allowed astronomers to use geometry, rather than assumptions about galaxy rotation, to better understand the structure of our galaxy. Share Details Last Updated Jul 02, 2026 Editor Lee Mohon Contact Joel Wallace joel.w.wallace@nasa.gov Megan Watzke mwatzke@cfa.harvard.edu Location Marshall Space Flight Center Related Terms Chandra X-Ray Observatory Astrophysics Galaxies Marshall Astrophysics Marshall Space Flight Center The Milky Way The Universe Share Details Last Updated Jul 02, 2026 Editor Lee Mohon Contact Joel Wallace joel.w.wallace@nasa.gov Megan Watzke mwatzke@cfa.harvard.edu Location Marshall Space Flight Center Related Terms Chandra X-Ray Observatory Astrophysics Galaxies Marshall Astrophysics Marshall Space Flight Center The Milky Way The Universe Explore More 7 min read NASA’s Chandra Reveals ‘Red, White, Blue’ Universe for US 250th Article 3 months ago 5 min read NASA’s Chandra Discovers Possible Supernova Remnant in Galactic Center Article 4 months ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly Article 6 months ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Chandra X-ray Observatory James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Solar System

5 Min Read NASA’s Chandra Discovers Possible Supernova Remnant in Galactic Center Lee Mohon Jun 11, 2026 Article Contents Visual Description News Media Contact Using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, astronomers may have found a supernova remnant in an intriguing neighborhood in the middle of our galaxy. A paper describing these new findings published in The Astrophysical Journal. Supernova remnants are the expanding remains of exploded stars and provide elements – like iron, oxygen, and silicon – that are critical for the formation of planets and for life as we know it to form and flourish. This new supernova remnant, if confirmed, would be one of the closest ever discovered to the supermassive black hole at the central region of the Milky Way galaxy, an exotic region crammed with massive stars, long threads of magnetic fields and dense clouds of gas orbiting rapidly around the Galactic Center. Astronomers may have uncovered a new supernova remnant in a star-forming region near the center of the Milky Way galaxy using data from Chandra and XMM-Newton. If confirmed, this would be one of the closest supernova remnants to the supermassive black hole in the Galactic Center. This image shows the region where the evidence was found, which contains X-rays from Chandra and XMM-Newton, radio data from the MeerKAT telescope in South Africa, and an optical image from the Pan-STARRS telescopes in Hawaii. X-ray: NASA/CXC/UCLA/Z. Zhu et al.; ESA/XMM-Newton; Optical: PanSTARRS; Radio: MeerKAT; Infrared (JWST): NASA/ESA/CSA/STScI; Image Processing: NASA/CXC/SAO/L. Frattare and P. Edmonds A new composite image of this region contains X-rays from Chandra and ESA’s (European Space Agency’s) XMM-Newton mission (shown in blue) as well as radio data from the MeerKAT telescope (shown in red) in South Africa. These have been combined with an optical image from the Pan-STARRS telescopes in Hawaii (red, green, and blue). The plane of the galaxy runs horizontally from left to right in the image, and the central black hole is off to the left of the image. The evidence for the new supernova remnant, located about 26,000 light-years from Earth, comes from X-ray data from Chandra and XMM-Newton. The X-ray data reveals a “blob” of X-ray emission that may come from the remains of a massive star that self-destructed as a supernova, buried within the larger cloud of expanding gas. The location of this suspected supernova remnant in the image is labeled with a circle. It is in a bubble of gas that has had electrons stripped away from hydrogen – called an “H II region” – surrounding a massive, young star. This bubble is a bright source of radio emission called Sagittarius C. If this is indeed a supernova remnant, then it is expanding at about two million miles per hour and is at least about 1,700 years old. Previously, observations with NASA’s now-retired SOFIA (Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy) mission had shown evidence for an expanding shell of gas surrounding Sagittarius C. This gave astronomers a hint that a stellar explosion had occurred in the same spot. The long filaments seen in the radio image are caused by energetic particles travelling along magnetic fields that are mostly directed perpendicular to the plane of the galaxy. The nuclear fusion engines of stars create elements from hydrogen and helium that were abundant at the beginning of the universe. When stars explode at the end of their lives as supernovae, they send these newly synthesized elements into interstellar space and provide material for the next generation of stars and planets. The team of astronomers searched the X-ray data for signs of increased amounts of key elements in the remnant, which would have been caused by the stellar explosion blasting them into space. While they did not see an enhancement, this could imply that the stellar debris has already mixed with the surrounding gas. An alternative explanation for the X-ray blob is that the hot gas comes from a collection of massive stars in the region. The authors of the recent study don’t think this explanation is likely, because the X-ray emission from the blob is more than ten times brighter than the X-ray emission of large, known stellar clusters with bright, massive stars. An additional image shows data from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope added to the X-ray and radio data. The light blue color represents infrared light from gas in the H II region, and the darker blue depicts X-rays from the supernova remnant candidate, on the right side of the image. X-rays near the center of the image are associated with the H II region, possibly caused by material blown away by massive stars that has heated gas to millions of degrees, producing X-rays. Sagittarius C, close-up image adding NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope data to the X-ray and radio data. The study’s authors are Zhenlin Zhu and Mark Morris of the University of California, Los Angeles; Gabriele Ponti of Italy’s National Institute for Astrophysics; and Ping Zhou of Nanjing University in China. NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, manages the Chandra program. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory's Chandra X-ray Center controls science operations from Cambridge, Massachusetts, and flight operations from Burlington, Massachusetts. Visual Description This release features a composite image of colorful, overlapping clouds, which suggests to astronomers that a supernova remnant may be buried in gas near the center of our Milky Way galaxy. Set against a backdrop packed with distant stars and other specks of light are two distinct, overlapping clouds. The larger, visually dominant cloud, is red and multifaceted. It has an irregular shape, and features patches of different textures, including pockets that resemble wispy smoke, tangles of faint red veins, and clear streaking lines. This large cloud of expanding gas represents radio data from the MeerKAT telescope in South Africa. Overlapping with that red cloud is a cloudy blue blob representing X-ray data from NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA's XMM-Newton. Astronomers suggest that this blue blob of X-ray emissions is the remains of a massive star destroyed by a supernova. Read more from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory To learn more about NASA’s Chandra mission, visit: https://science.nasa.gov/chandra https://chandra.si.edu News Media Contact Megan Watzke Chandra X-ray Center Cambridge, Mass. 617-496-7998 mwatzke@cfa.harvard.edu Joel Wallace Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama 256-544-0034 joel.w.wallace@nasa.gov About the Author Lee Mohon Share Details Last Updated Jun 12, 2026 Editor Lee Mohon Contact Joel Wallace joel.w.wallace@nasa.gov Location Marshall Space Flight Center Related Terms Chandra X-Ray Observatory James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Marshall Astrophysics Marshall Science Research & Projects Marshall Space Flight Center Supernova Remnants Supernovae The Universe Explore More 4 min read NASA Connects Little Red Dots with Chandra, Webb Article 5 months ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly Article 6 months ago 6 min read NASA Discovers Crash of Extreme Stars in Unexpected Site A fleet of NASA missions has likely uncovered a collision between two ultradense stars in… Article 7 months ago Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Chandra X-ray Observatory IXPE The Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer (IXPE) is NASA’s first mission to study the polarization of X-rays. James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe.

Explore Hubble 1 min read LKH Milky Way Merger Illustration About 12 billion years ago, a dwarf galaxy known as LKH (left) collided with a young Milky Way (right) and merged with it. This artist's concept portrays that collision. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope uncovered definitive evidence of this long-ago collision by studying ancient globular star clusters. Release Date August 17, 2026 Science Release Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years Read the release Credit Illustration: NASA, ESA, Joseph Olmsted (STScI) Downloads Full res "Artist's Concept" watermarked (For Print), 3840 × 2160 tif (23.74 MB) Full res "Artist's Concept" watermarked (For Display), 3840 × 2160 png (11.6 MB) Full res (For Display), 3840 × 2160 jpg (3.77 MB) Full res (For Print), 3840 × 2160 tif (23.74 MB) For Display (Half Res), 1920 × 1080 jpg (1.21 MB) Share Details Last Updated Aug 18, 2026 Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Claire Andreoli NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland claire.andreoli@nasa.gov Related Terms Hubble Space Telescope Galaxies The Milky Way Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Hubble Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble Science Highlights Hubble's most notable scientific discoveries reflect the broad range of research and the breakthroughs it has achieved. Hubble Images Explore Hubble's iconic images of the universe, and view photos of mission operations and astronauts servicing Hubble in space. Hubble News

Globular Clusters Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years 5 min read New Hubble data shows definitive evidence of a dwarf galaxy merging with the young Milky Way in the earliest phases… Aug 17, 2026 Article Omega Centauri Context Image 1 min read Astronomers found Omega Centauri’s first stellar-mass black hole, which has a visible star companion that is shown in greater detail.… Jul 13, 2026 Image NASA’s Hubble Discovers First of Star Cluster’s Missing Black Holes 5 min read Astronomers using archival data from Hubble and supportive observations from Webb have located their first stellar-mass black hole in the… Jul 13, 2026 Article NASA’s Hubble Spies Stellar Sparkler for July 4th 3 min read Red, white, and blue stars glitter like a sparkler being waved on a dark night in this new image from… Jul 4, 2026 Article NASA’s Hubble Spots Star-Spangled Cosmic Scene 3 min read More than 500,000 stars blaze red, white, and blue in this NASA Hubble image of the globular cluster Messier 3… Jul 3, 2026 Article Hubble Spies Starry Chandelier 3 min read This NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope image features the globular cluster NGC 6723, sometimes called the Chandelier Cluster. Jun 26, 2026 Article NASA’s Hubble Identifies One of Darkest Known Galaxies 3 min read In the vast tapestry of the universe, most galaxies shine brightly across cosmic time and space. Yet a rare class… Feb 18, 2026 Article Dark Galaxy CDG-2 Near Perseus Cluster 1 min read The low-surface-brightness galaxy CDG-2, within the dashed red circle at right, is dominated by dark matter and contains only a… Feb 18, 2026 Image Dark Galaxy Near Perseus Cluster (Compass Image) 1 min read This image of dark galaxy CDG-2 was captured by the Hubble Space Telescope’s ACS (Advanced Camera for Surveys) with additional… Feb 18, 2026 Image News & Articles See All News Article 5 Min Read Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Discovers First of Star Cluster’s Missing Black Holes Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Spies Stellar Sparkler for July 4th Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Spots Star-Spangled Cosmic Scene Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

Star Clusters Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending IC 348 (NIRCam Image) 1 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope recently observed IC 348, a star-forming region just 1,000 light-years away from Earth. Webb’s sharp… Sep 15, 2026 Image Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years 5 min read New Hubble data shows definitive evidence of a dwarf galaxy merging with the young Milky Way in the earliest phases… Aug 17, 2026 Article Omega Centauri Context Image 1 min read Astronomers found Omega Centauri’s first stellar-mass black hole, which has a visible star companion that is shown in greater detail.… Jul 13, 2026 Image NASA’s Hubble Discovers First of Star Cluster’s Missing Black Holes 5 min read Astronomers using archival data from Hubble and supportive observations from Webb have located their first stellar-mass black hole in the… Jul 13, 2026 Article NASA’s Hubble Spies Stellar Sparkler for July 4th 3 min read Red, white, and blue stars glitter like a sparkler being waved on a dark night in this new image from… Jul 4, 2026 Article NASA’s Hubble Spots Star-Spangled Cosmic Scene 3 min read More than 500,000 stars blaze red, white, and blue in this NASA Hubble image of the globular cluster Messier 3… Jul 3, 2026 Article Hubble Spies Starry Chandelier 3 min read This NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope image features the globular cluster NGC 6723, sometimes called the Chandelier Cluster. Jun 26, 2026 Article NASA Webb, Hubble Reveal History of Relic of Milky Way’s Formation 7 min read Researchers using two of humanity’s most powerful observatories — NASA’s James Webb and Hubble Space Telescopes — have definitively shown… Jun 16, 2026 Article Bulge Fossil Fragment Terzan 5 (Webb and Hubble Image) 1 min read New observations from Webb combined with multiple observations from Hubble prove that Terzan 5 is a self-contained, self-enriching stellar system… Jun 16, 2026 Image News & Articles See All News Article 5 Min Read Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Discovers First of Star Cluster’s Missing Black Holes Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Spies Stellar Sparkler for July 4th Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Spots Star-Spangled Cosmic Scene Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

The Milky Way Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years 5 min read New Hubble data shows definitive evidence of a dwarf galaxy merging with the young Milky Way in the earliest phases… Aug 17, 2026 Article LKH Milky Way Merger Illustration 1 min read About 12 billion years ago, a dwarf galaxy known as LKH collided with a young Milky Way and merged with… Aug 17, 2026 Image What’s Up: July 2026 Skywatching Tips from NASA 3 min read A predawn Moon-and-planets meetup, a returning comet, a great chance to see the Milky Way, and Saturn’s rings at a… Jul 1, 2026 Article NASA’s Chandra Examines Milky Way at Arms’ Length 5 min read A new result using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory shows that the outer spiral arms in the Milky Way galaxy may… Jul 1, 2026 Article Euclid Sees Heart of Milky Way 1 min read Euclid, an ESA (European Space Agency) mission with NASA contributions, took a new look at the heart of our Milky… Jun 26, 2026 Image Article NASA Webb, Hubble Reveal History of Relic of Milky Way’s Formation 7 min read Researchers using two of humanity’s most powerful observatories — NASA’s James Webb and Hubble Space Telescopes — have definitively shown… Jun 16, 2026 Article Bulge Fossil Fragment Terzan 5 (Webb and Hubble Image) 1 min read New observations from Webb combined with multiple observations from Hubble prove that Terzan 5 is a self-contained, self-enriching stellar system… Jun 16, 2026 Image Terzan 5 (Webb and Hubble Compass Image) 1 min read This image of bulge fossil fragment Terzan 5 was captured by the James Webb and Hubble space telescopes. Webb’s data… Jun 16, 2026 Image Zoom to See Terzan 5 Near Our Milky Way Galaxy’s Bulge 1 min read Zoom in to Terzan 5, a star cluster that lies within the crowded central region of our Milky Way galaxy… Jun 16, 2026 Video News & Articles See All News Article 5 Min Read Hubble Solves Merger Mystery From Milky Way’s Early Years Article 3 Min Read What’s Up: July 2026 Skywatching Tips from NASA Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Chandra Examines Milky Way at Arms’ Length Article 7 Min Read NASA Webb, Hubble Reveal History of Relic of Milky Way’s Formation Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

Explore the Universe The Universe Glossary Use your browser's "FIND" capability to locate a word right away on this page or click the group of letters in the right navigation menu to skip to that section of the glossary. A - D E - H I - L M - P Q - T U - Z A absolute zero The coldest possible temperature. It is the lowest temperature on the Kelvin temperature scale, equivalent to -459.67 F (–273.15 C). At this temperature, molecules have reached their minimum energy and cannot transfer heat, but they are never completely motionless because they retain energy to vibrate. As of 2021, the lowest temperature achieved in experiments was 38 picokelvin (3.8 x 10 -11 K), or 38 trillionths of a degree above absolute zero. absorption The process in which atoms or molecules retain the energy delivered by electromagnetic radiation that strikes them. When an atom absorbs light, its electrons are excited into higher energy states. accretion Growth by the gradual accumulation of additional matter. In astronomy, the term describes growth by the gravitational attraction of matter in the form of gas, dust, rocky or icy debris, and other objects. Young stars, planets, and black holes grow in this way. accretion disk A relatively flat, rapidly rotating cloud of gas or dust surrounding any massive object growing in size by attracting matter through gravity (accretion), such as a newborn star or a black hole. active galactic nucleus (AGN), active galaxy A class of galaxies with central regions that appear much brighter than ordinary galaxies and emit unusually large amounts of X-ray, ultraviolet, and other radiation. The central region is called the galactic nucleus (plural, nuclei). Astronomers think supermassive black holes at the centers of AGN produce the additional energy as matter stored in vast accretion disks falls into them. Seyfert galaxies, radio galaxies, quasars, and blazars are all AGN. The term is sometimes shortened to active galaxy. afterglow Lower-energy electromagnetic radiation, including X-rays, visible light, and radio waves, that often follow the initial burst of gamma rays in a gamma-ray burst. Afterglows can persist for days to weeks, gradually dissipating with time. The BeppoSAX satellite discovered the afterglow phenomenon in 1997. ammonia A molecule composed of one atom of nitrogen and three of hydrogen (NH 3 ). It can be found as either a gas (in planetary atmospheres and accretion disks) or a solid (as ice on the surfaces of dust grains, comets, and planets). Ammonia was the first multiatomic molecule found in interstellar space (1968). amplitude The size of a wave from the top of a wave crest to its midpoint. angstrom (Å) A metric unit of length equal to 0.1 nanometer (10 -10 meters), used to specify wavelengths of light, named for Swedish physicist Anders Jonas Ångström (1814-1874). angular momentum A property of a mass or system of masses turning about some fixed point, for example, a planet in orbit around a star. It is defined as the body's mass multiplied by its velocity and its distance from the center of motion. In a closed system, it is a conserved quantity in physics, which means it remains constant. For example, a planet in an eccentric orbit constantly changes the distance from its star. Since the planet's mass is constant, its velocity must change too — faster at perihelion, slower at aphelion — so that its angular momentum remains the same at every point in the orbit. The conservation of angular momentum explains Kepler's second law of planetary motion. annihilation The mutual conversion of a particle and its antiparticle into electromagnetic radiation, converting their mass (m) into energy (E) according to Einstein's famous formula, E = mc 2 , where c is the speed of light. An electron and a positron annihilate to produce two gamma-ray photons, each with an energy of 511 keV. anticoincidence detector A system on a gamma-ray observatory that triggers when it detects a charged particle entering the telescope so a detector does not mistake the incoming particle for a gamma ray. antimatter Counterparts of the subatomic particles making up normal matter that have opposite properties, typically electrical charge (exceptions: the antineutron has reversed magnetic polarity, and antineutrinos have reversed spin). When a particle and its antiparticle collide, they annihilate. The positron is the antiparticle of the electron. By manipulating positrons into orbit around antiprotons, scientists at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) created the first antimatter atoms — antihydrogen — in 1995. apoapsis [ap-oh-AP-sis] The farthest point in the path of an orbiting body; its opposite is periapsis. The concept has special names in commonly used systems: apastron, for a body orbiting a star apogee, for a body orbiting Earth apojove, for a body orbiting Jupiter aphelion, for a body orbiting the Sun apolune, for a body orbiting the Moon arcminute An angular measurement equal to 1/60th of a degree. It is approximately the smallest angle discernible to the unaided human eye. As viewed from Earth, both the Sun and the Moon appear about 30 arcminutes across. arcsecond An angular measurement equal to 1/3,600th of a degree or 1/60th of an arcminute. This is about the apparent thickness of a U.S. dime coin viewed from a distance of about 913 feet (278 meters). asteroid A rocky object larger than 3.3 feet (1 meter) and smaller than a planet that orbits a star; also called minor planets. Most asteroids in our solar system orbit the Sun between Mars and Jupiter in a region called the main asteroid belt. The largest asteroid, Ceres, has a diameter of 966 kilometers (600 miles) and is additionally classified as a dwarf planet. astronomical unit (au or AU) A unit of length approximating the average distance from Earth to the Sun and formally defined as 149,597,870.7 km (92,955,807.3 miles). It is commonly used to describe distances within our own and other planetary systems. astronomy The scientific study of matter in outer space, especially the positions, dimensions, distribution, motion, composition, energy, and evolution of celestial bodies and phenomena. astrophysics The branch of astronomy concerned with the physical nature of stars, galaxies, interstellar clouds and other objects, including their luminosities, temperatures, densities and chemical composition. atmosphere The envelope of gases surrounding a planet, moon, or star. Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescope (ACT) A ground-based telescope that observes high-energy gamma rays and cosmic rays through the faint flashes of blue light they produce on interacting with Earth's atmosphere. When they strike an air molecule, the collision shatters its atoms into their constituent particles — protons, neutrons, electrons — and produces others, such as muons and pions. These particles then strike other atoms, producing more fast-moving debris that breaks apart more atoms, and so on. This cascade of particles (air shower) moves faster through the air than light is able to, which results in a broad blue flash called Cherenkov light, named for the Russian physicist Pavel Cherenkov (1904–1990). atom The smallest unit of an element that retains the element's chemical characteristics. An atom consists of a central nucleus containing one or more positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons (except for hydrogen, which may have no neutrons) orbited by one or more negatively charged electrons. Atoms of each element possess a unique number of protons (for example, one for hydrogen, eight for oxygen). atomic nucleus The tiny, dense center of an atom, consisting of positively charged protons and (except for hydrogen) uncharged neutrons. A nucleus (plural, nuclei) accounts for more than 99.9% of an atom’s mass but represents only 0.01% of its volume. Most are shaped like spheres or ellipsoids, and some are unstable and undergo radioactive decay. aurora A natural light display predominantly seen in Earth's northern and southern high-latitude regions, appearing as dynamic streamers, curtains, and arches of shimmering light; also called the northern and southern lights. The phenomenon occurs around two vast ovals in the upper atmosphere. When the paths of electrons and protons near Earth become disturbed by solar activity, they can follow magnetic field lines into the atmosphere, exciting atoms and molecules that respond by emitting light of characteristic colors. Similar processes create auroras detected on Mars, Jupiter, Jupiter's moon Io, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, comet 67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko, and — beyond the solar system — the brown dwarf LSR J1835+3259. B Balmer series A set of visible emission or absorption lines in the spectrum of hydrogen that arise from electron transitions between the atom's first excited state and those at higher energies, discovered by the Swiss physicist Johann Balmer (1825–1898). The first four lines are identified using the chemical symbol for hydrogen (H) and the lowercase Greek letters alpha (α), beta (β), gamma (γ) and delta (δ). Because hydrogen is the universe's most abundant element, the Balmer lines play a major role in how we see the cosmos. For example, the light of the Hα line provides the prominent reddish color to images of emission nebulae taken in natural light. Hydrogen also produces additional line sets beyond visible light, including the Lyman series (ultraviolet, important for cosmology), the Paschen series (infrared) and the Brackett series (far infrared). bar A metric unit of pressure. At sea level, Earth's atmosphere exerts a pressure just over 1 bar. By contrast, the very thin atmosphere of Mars has a surface pressure less the 1% of Earth's, while the thick atmosphere of Venus produces an average pressure 92 times greater than Earth's. baryon [BARRY-on] A class of hadrons built from three quarks that includes protons and neutrons. The other class, called mesons, are unstable particles built from only two quarks. Baryons produce both electromagnetic and gravitational signals that reveal their presence throughout the universe. In astronomy, the term "baryonic matter" refers more loosely to the normal atomic matter (including electrons) that makes up people, planets, stars and galaxies. It represents just 4.9% of the mass-energy in the universe. baryonic acoustic oscillations (BAO) Sound waves from the early universe whose imprint is reflected in the large-scale distribution of matter. When the universe was a hot, dense plasma, regions with greater concentrations of light and matter were at higher pressure and sound waves rippled outward from them. These waves carried along ordinary (baryonic) matter until the universe cooled enough that light could travel freely, which is when the cosmic microwave background formed. The movement of matter from sound waves up to this time resulted in spherical shells of excess density throughout the cosmos, and they grew in size as the universe expanded. BAOs appear in the temperature variations of the cosmic microwave background, and today they leave a faint imprint in the clustering of galaxies — detectable as a small excess in the number of galaxy pairs separated by about 500 million light-years. These features serve as "standard rulers" that allow astronomers to probe the expansion rate of the universe and learn more about dark energy. basalt A volcanic rock, dark grey to black in color, made of iron- and magnesium-rich silicate minerals. More than 90% of all volcanic rock on Earth is basalt, and it is also common on the Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Mars. Be [bee-ee] star A hot, often variable star of spectral class B that shows emission lines (the "e" in the name) in its spectrum. Be stars rotate so rapidly that they eject gas, which collects into a surrounding disk thought to be many times the star's size. Hydrogen emission lines arise because the star's ultraviolet light interacts with the gaseous disk. Examples include Gamma Cassiopeiae A — the first one identified, in 1866 — and the bright southern star Achernar (Alpha Eridani A). big bang A widely accepted model of the universe that explains its observed properties by postulating that it originated as a tiny, superdense, rapidly expanding fireball about 13.8 billion years ago. The universe expanded, cooled, and condensed into subatomic particles that later accumulated into the matter that formed stars and galaxies. The model naturally explains the cosmic microwave background, the expansion of space, and the ratio of hydrogen, helium, and other light elements observed throughout the universe. binary star Two stars that are gravitationally bound together and orbit their common center of mass. biosignature An indicator that provides scientific evidence for the presence of past or present life. In exoplanet research, scientists have suggested that certain gases — such as oxygen, ozone, methane, nitrous oxide, methyl bromide, methyl chloride, hydrogen sulfide, carbonyl sulfide, phosphine, sulfur dioxide and others — could accumulate in the atmosphere of an exoplanet as byproducts of life. Detecting spectral lines from such gases could, in principle, allow astronomers to determine the presence of life on these worlds. blackbody An idealized opaque, non-reflective object that both emits and absorbs all forms of light perfectly. This results in a specific continuous spectrum (a blackbody spectrum)that depends only on the blackbody's temperature. Stars and planets are often described by their blackbody temperature, that is, the temperature of a perfect radiator that would emit the same total amount of light observed. The body's actual surface temperature may be quite different depending on additional properties, such as the presence of a heat-retaining atmosphere around a planet. An extreme example is Venus, which has a blackbody temperature of -42 F (-41 C) but a globally averaged surface temperature of 867 F (464 C). black dwarf A hypothetical stellar remnant formed once a white dwarf has radiated away all of its energy and no longer emits heat or light. The time required to reach this state is expected to be hundreds of billions of years. Because this is far longer than the age of our universe, they do not yet exist. black hole An object whose gravity is so strong that not even light can escape it. Black holes are completely characterized by only three qualities: mass, rotation, and electrical charge. Abundant observational evidence exists for stellar-mass black holes , with masses from four to dozens of times the mass of our Sun formed through the collapse of massive stars at the ends of their lives, with the most massive objects formed through mergers with other black holes. Supermassive black holes weighing hundreds of thousands to billions of solar masses are observed at the centers of most large galaxies and power AGNs. Although expected to exist, there is less certain evidence for intermediate-mass black holes of hundreds to 100,000 solar masses. Primordial black holes are hypothetical objects that may have formed in the early universe; they represent a possible explanation for dark matter and could have masses ranging from asteroid-like to about as much as stellar-mass black holes. blazar [BLEY-zar] A type of active galactic nucleus often appearing as a bright, highly variable point-like source that does not display emission lines. Blazars vary dramatically in all forms of light, so studying them requires simultaneous multiwavelength observations. Astronomers think an accreting supermassive black hole at the center of a blazar drives jets of matter that travel outward in opposite directions at nearly the speed of light. Blazars appear so bright and variable because we are looking almost directly down the barrel of one jet. blue supergiant star A massive blue star of extreme luminosity, surface temperature, and size. Blue supergiants are among the brightest stars in the universe. Several such stars can be seen in the constellation Orion, the brightest being Rigel, which has about 20 times the mass of our Sun, is at least 70 times larger, has a surface more than twice as hot as the Sun's, and emits 120,000 times the Sun's luminosity. The sizes and temperatures of blue supergiants allow them to drive strong outflows (stellar winds) into their surroundings. blueshift An apparent shift toward shorter (bluer) wavelengths of an object's spectral lines or emitted light caused by its motion toward an observer. bolometric luminosity The total energy radiated by an object at all wavelengths, usually given in watts. The Sun's bolometric luminosity is 3.83 x 10 26 watts. Boltzmann constant (k) A number that relates the temperature of an ideal gas to the average kinetic energy of molecules in the gas. It is defined as 1.380649 x 10 –23 joule per kelvin. Named for Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906). bremsstrahlung [BREM-shtrah-luhng] Light emitted when a charged particle, such as an electron, decelerates when deflected by the electric and magnetic fields of another particle or atomic nucleus. Very fast charged particles primarily lose energy by this process when traveling through matter. The term is a German word that literally means "braking radiation." brown dwarf A substellar object lacking the mass needed to sustain the hydrogen fusion processes found in the cores of full-fledged stars. Brown dwarfs have masses between 1% and 8% of our Sun's, or between 13 and 80 times the mass of Jupiter, spectral types of M, L, T, and Y, and surface temperatures below about 5,800 F (3,200 C). C calibration A process for translating the signals produced by a measuring instrument (such as a detector attached to a telescope) into something that is scientifically useful. This procedure removes most of the errors caused by environmental and instrumental instabilities. calorimeter An instrument for measuring the energy of a particle or photon through the amount of heat deposited in a material. Canadian Space Agency (CSA) The Canadian Space Agency is an independent federal agency responsible for managing all of Canada's civil space-related activities. carbon dioxide A molecule composed of one atom of carbon and two of oxygen (CO2). In its frozen form, it's known as dry ice. Carbon dioxide is a common molecule and can be found as a gas in planetary atmospheres, as solid grains in molecular clouds, and in icy features on the surfaces of comets and planets. The south polar ice cap of Mars is topped by a permanent layer of frozen carbon dioxide about 26 feet (8 meters) thick. cataclysmic variable A close binary star system where a white dwarf accretes gas from a low-mass normal star. The gas collects into an accretion disk around the white dwarf and then flows onto its surface, producing X-rays. In some systems, this gas accumulates and eventually begins thermonuclear fusion reactions, producing a nova outburst that suddenly increases the system's apparent brightness by up to 100,000 times. centaur A small solar system body orbiting the Sun between Jupiter and Neptune that crosses the orbit of at least one giant planet. Centaurs are widely thought to have been ejected from the Kuiper Belt, but some may have been produced through the breakup of comets or by impact events on icy moons. Cepheid [SEE-fee-id, SEF-ee-id] A type of star that undergoes repeating cycles of brightness changes as it regularly expands and contracts. The length of this cycle is directly related to the star's luminosity, and astronomers can determine its distance by comparing this to the star's observed brightness. This discovery, made in 1912 by Henrietta Leavitt (1868-1921), makes cepheid variables a powerful astronomical tool for measuring cosmic distances. The class is named for its prototype, Delta Cephei, and includes Polaris, the closest cepheid to the Sun. Chandrasekhar limit The theoretical maximum mass of a white dwarf, equal to about 1.4 solar masses. Beyond it, a white dwarf must collapse into a neutron star. Named for Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar (1910–1995), who first proposed the idea in 1931. chemical evolution Chemical changes that transformed simple molecules into the more complex substances needed for the origin of life under conditions very different from those on present-day Earth. Amino acids found in asteroids and meteorites could have arrived on Earth via impacts, for example, but the steps by which they were assembled into self-replicating molecules like RNA and DNA, which carry the genetic information of living organisms, remain unknown. circumstellar disk/protoplanetary disk A flattened, circular, rotating cloud of gas, dust, rocky or icy fragments, and larger objects orbiting a star. Around the youngest stars, such disks serve as cocoons where planets may form. climate The long-term pattern of oceanic and atmospheric conditions at a location, described by measurements of average and extreme temperature, precipitation, and other variables, and by the intensity, frequency, and duration of weather events. cluster of galaxies A system of galaxies containing anywhere between a few and a few thousand member galaxies that are gravitationally bound together. Also called a galaxy cluster. collecting area The area of a telescope that is capable of collecting light. The more light a telescope can collect (that is, the larger its collecting area), the better it can detect faint objects. comet A small ice-rich body, typically less than about 12 miles (20 kilometers) across, that travels around the Sun, often in highly eccentric orbits. The solid body is also called the comet's nucleus. It is composed of frozen gases — including water ice, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, methane, and ammonia — mixed with dust and organic molecules. When a comet nears the Sun, it warms up, and ice on the surface converts to gas, forming jets that carry ice and dust into space. This material surrounds the comet with a vast atmosphere, called a coma, typically up to 50,000 miles (80,000 kilometers) across. Ultraviolet sunlight breaks up water molecules released by the comet, and this forms a vast, thin neutral hydrogen cloud visible only in ultraviolet light that may span 62 million miles (100 million kilometers). Radiation pressure from sunlight pushes dust grains averaging a micrometer across — about the size of particles in smoke — out of the coma. They sweep back into a gently curved dust tail that glows by reflecting sunlight and may extend tens of millions of kilometers; it is the most visually striking phenomenon associated with comets. Additionally, the solar wind acts on charged ions broken off of molecules by ultraviolet sunlight, sweeping them into a straight, narrow, bluish, and visually faint gas tail (also called an ion or plasma tail) that shines by fluorescence. Comets also emit X-rays as they interact with the solar wind, a phenomenon first detected in 1996 by the German-led ROSAT mission. compact object An extremely dense stellar object, such as a black hole, neutron star, or white dwarf. We observe such an object as a point source, too small to resolve. composition The materials that make up an object or group of objects. Compton scattering A transfer of energy between a photon and a particle, such as an electron, that lowers the photon's energy and increases the velocity of the particle. Inverse Compton scattering occurs when a charged particle transfers some of its energy to a photon, boosting it to higher energy, and plays an important role in astrophysics. When light from microwave to ultraviolet wavelengths collides with a high-energy particle, the interaction can boost the photon to gamma-ray energies. constellation One of 88 regions dividing the celestial sphere, formalized in 1930. They enclose recognizable star patterns recorded by various cultures, particularly those from ancient Greece. The patterns are imaginatively described as representing, animals (Leo, Taurus), mythological figures (Orion, Andromeda, Perseus), or recognizable objects (Telescopium, Triangulum). Not all familiar star patterns are constellations. For example, the Big Dipper is a well-known arrangement (called an asterism) within the constellation Ursa Major. corona (plural: coronae) The faint, tenuous, uppermost level of a star's atmosphere. The Sun's corona extends many thousands of kilometers above its visible surface, gradually transforming into the solar wind that flows outward through our solar system. The solar corona is characterized by very low densities and enormously high temperatures (over 2 million F, 1 million C), although scientists aren’t sure exactly why the corona is so hot. coronagraph An instrument designed to block direct light from the Sun or another star so that objects otherwise lost in its glare may be observed. cosmic dust Tiny, irregularly-shaped solid particles — measuring between a few molecules and 0.004 inches (0.1 mm) across — found in space. Much of the dust in our solar system originates from comets, asteroids, and planets and their satellites, but material from interstellar space, formed in the atmospheres of aging stars, stellar outbursts, and supernova explosions, also passes through. Such particles are the largest source of extraterrestrial material arriving on present-day Earth, with an estimated 30 or more tons entering the atmosphere each day; most of these particles were shed by Jupiter-family comets. Particles originating from interstellar space, called presolar grains because they formed before the Sun did, are found both in in meteorites and cosmic dust. Dust is important because stars and their planets form inside vast, cool, dusty interstellar clouds. These clouds absorb visible light, looking like large dark features in our own and other galaxies. In broad terms, there are three types of dust: icy grains, found in regions like the outer solar system; silicate particles, which resemble grains of sand; and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are large molecules of carbon and hydrogen that resemble soot. cosmic microwave background (CMB) A faint signal present everywhere in the sky and the oldest light we can detect, discovered in 1965 by American astronomers Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson. It is the afterglow of the hot, young, expanding universe at a time when it was only about 380,000 years old, a fraction of its current age of 13.8 billion years. Before this time, the universe was a hot, dense plasma filled with electrons, protons, nuclei, neutrinos, other particles, and light. All light was tied up with interactions between particles, especially electrons, so it couldn't travel far before striking one of them, making the universe an opaque fog. As the universe expanded and cooled below about 4,900 F (2,700 C), electrons, protons, and nuclei could combine into atoms. This greatly reduced the number of free electrons that light could crash into, and for the first time the universe became transparent — light could travel unimpeded through the cosmos. The continued expansion of space has redshifted the wavelength of this glow by about 1,100 times, so we detect the CMB in the microwave part of the electromagnetic spectrum, brightest at a wavelength of 1.9 mm (corresponding to near-ultraviolet light when it last bounced off an electron). The CMB exhibits a perfect blackbody spectrum with an average temperature of about -454.765 F (-270.425 C or 2.725 K) and shows minute temperature differences (measured in microkelvins) that were first detected by NASA's COBE satellite and mapped in greater detail by the WMAP and Planck missions. These variations reflect differences in the density of the universe that were already present before the CMB formed and that ultimately led to the formation of the first stars and galaxies. cosmic rays Atomic nuclei — about 90% of them protons — and elementary particles, such as electrons, that travel through interstellar space at speeds approaching that of light. When the term was coined in 1925, it was not yet known that they were particles, not rays, but the name stuck. Trillions upon trillions of cosmic rays hit Earth every day, most from the Sun, and nearly all blocked by our planet's atmosphere and magnetic field. Sometimes, though, a cosmic ray will strike molecules in the atmosphere and create a shower of secondary particles that reach the ground. They are important cosmic "messengers," but because they carry electric charge, they are easily diverted by our galaxy's magnetic field and do not travel to us straight from their sources (unlike light and neutrinos). cosmochemistry The study of the chemical compositions of matter in the universe and the processes that produced them, primarily focused on objects in our own solar system. For example, meteorites contain features that provide insight into the circumstellar disk from which the planets grew. Some, called presolar grains, are samples of matter ejected by dying stars before the solar system formed. cosmological constant (Λ) A mathematical fix to the general theory of relativity, symbolized by the capital Greek letter lambda (Λ), which Einstein proposed in the mistaken belief that the universe was static, neither expanding nor contracting. By 1929 observations made clear that the universe is expanding, and so this fix was unnecessary. If Einstein had believed what his equations were telling him, he could have claimed the expansion of the universe as perhaps the greatest and most convincing prediction of general relativity. He called his introduction of the term the "biggest blunder of my life." cosmological distance A distance far beyond the boundaries of our galaxy. When viewing objects at cosmological distances, the curved nature of space-time introduces effects such as time dilation and cosmological redshift. cosmological principle This principle states that the distribution of matter across very large distances is the same everywhere in the universe and that the universe looks the same in all directions. According to this principle, our view of the universe is like the view from a boat on an ocean, which is essentially the same for any other person on any other boat on any other ocean. Measurements of matter and energy in the universe on the largest observable scales support the cosmological principle. cosmological redshift An effect where light emitted from a distant source appears redshifted because of the expansion of space-time. cosmology The branch of astrophysics concerned with the origin, development, and structure of the universe. D dark energy A theoretical pressure that affects the universe on the largest scales and appears to drive the accelerating expansion of space. While cosmologists have determined that it makes up 68% of the total energy in the present-day universe, the nature of dark energy is unknown. dark matter Hypothetical non-baryonic matter of unknown composition that does not emit or reflect enough electromagnetic radiation to be observed directly, but whose presence can be inferred from gravitational effects on visible matter. Observations of the motions of stars and gas in galaxies, the properties of hot gas in galaxy clusters and the radial velocities of their member galaxies, and gravitational lensing of distant background galaxies by foreground galaxy clusters indicate the presence of large amounts of dark matter. It is now thought to comprise 27% of the universe's total energy. Candidate particles include WIMPs, axions, and even primordial black holes. de Broglie wavelength The quantum mechanical wavelength associated with a particle as part of the dual wave-particle nature of matter, named after Louis de Broglie (1892–1987). In 1924 he proposed the concept that matter behaves like a wave. In quantum mechanics, all massive particles have wave characteristics, with the wavelength of a particle equal to the Planck constant divided by the particle's momentum. debris disk A flattened, circular, rotating cloud of dust, rocky or icy fragments, and larger objects orbiting a star. Unlike circumstellar and protoplanetary disks, debris disks contain little gas and resemble the Kuiper Belt in our solar system. declination A celestial coordinate which, along with right ascension, locates any position in the sky. Analogous to latitude on Earth, it extends from +90 degrees to –90 degrees. degree An angular measure devised so there are 360° in a circle. From Earth, the Sun and Moon both appear to be about 0.5° across. One degree equals 60 arcminutes. 2. A unit in the Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales. density The ratio of an object's mass to its volume. For example, water has a density of one gram of mass for every milliliter (cubic centimeter) of volume. The density of lead is 11 times greater. dewar [doo-ur] A double-walled container of metal or silvered glass with a vacuum between the walls, used to hold low-temperature liquids. In astronomy, dewars are often used for liquid nitrogen (-321 F or -196 C), but can also be used for liquid helium (-452 F or -269 C) or solid neon (-429 F or -256 C). These materials are used because astronomical detectors work better at such cold temperatures. Named for the inventor Sir James Dewar (1842–1923), a Scottish chemist and physicist. diffraction grating A device that splits light into its component colors, used for obtaining a spectrum. A diffraction grating often consists of a mirror etched with thousands of closely spaced parallel lines, which spread out the light into parallel bands of color or distinct lines or bars. diffuse galactic emission Widespread gamma-ray emission along the plane of our Milky Way galaxy. It arises mostly from cosmic rays interacting with interstellar gas, dust, and starlight. digital image A visible image that is recorded by an electronic detector and subdivided into small picture elements (pixels). Each element is assigned a number that corresponds to the brightness recorded at its physical location on the detector. Computer software converts the numerical information into a visual image. The Hubble Space Telescope records digital images. disk The apparent circular shape of the Sun, a planet, or the Moon when seen in the sky or through a telescope. A flattened, rotating, circular region of gas, dust, and/or stars. It may refer to material surrounding a star (circumstellar disk, protoplanetary disk, debris disk), material falling onto a black hole or neutron star (accretion disk), a type of flattened galaxy that includes spiral galaxies, or the component of such a galaxy that is rich in gas, dust, young stars and includes its spiral arms (galactic disk). dispersion The separation of light, as by a prism, into a series of colors. The speed of light passing through a transparent medium depends on its wavelength, so a beam of light passing through a prism fans out into its component colors. Shorter wavelengths, like purple and blue light, bend the most. Longer wavelengths, like red and orange light, bend the least. Doppler effect The apparent change in wavelength of sound or light caused by the motion of the source, observer, or both. In astronomy, the Doppler effect seen in the shift of spectral lines can reveal companion objects (stars or planets) orbiting stars, stellar motion through the galaxy, the motions of galaxies themselves, and the expansion of the universe. Waves emitted by a moving object as received by an observer will be blueshifted (compressed, with shorter wavelengths) if approaching, redshifted (elongated, with longer wavelengths) if receding. This change occurs both in sound and light — and indeed for any wave when there is relative motion between the observer and the source. An everyday example is the sound of a siren, which slides from a higher to lower pitch as it passes an observer. How much the frequency changes depends on how fast the object is moving toward or away from the receiver. It is named for Austrian physicist and mathematician Christian Andreas Doppler (1803-1853), who described the phenomenon in 1842. dwarf galaxy The most common galaxy type, often found as companions to larger galaxies. They typically have low masses (less than a billion Suns), small sizes (33,000 light-years or less), and low luminosities that make them difficult to detect. The Large and Small Magellanic Clouds, visible in the Southern Hemisphere, are two of many satellite galaxies that orbit our Milky Way; they are classified as dwarf irregular galaxies. Two other forms, dwarf ellipticals and dwarf spheroidals, also exist. dwarf planet A celestial body within the solar system that is like a planet in that it orbits the Sun directly (it is not a moon) and has enough mass to have a spherical or nearly spherical shape. Unlike a planet, however, a dwarf planet is not massive enough to clear its orbital path of similar-sized objects. Dwarf planets include Ceres, Pluto, Eris, Makemake, and Haumea. dwarf star With no other qualification, the term refers to a main sequence star. Dwarfs have average or low luminosity, mass, and size, range in color from blue to red, with corresponding surface temperatures from above 17,000 F (9,400 C) to 4,000 F (2,200 C). Red dwarfs, the least massive and luminous stars, are also the most numerous, accounting for 75% of the stars in our galaxy; they have masses from 8% to 60% of the Sun's and spectral types K or M. Orange dwarfs have masses between 60% and 90% of the Sun's, have surface temperatures between 6,500 F (3,600 C) and 9,000 F (5,000 C) and spectral type K. Yellow dwarfs, which includes the Sun, have a mass range from 84% to 115% of the Sun's, surface temperatures of 5,300 to 6,000 K, and spectral type G. For rare, hot, blue O- and B-type stars, the term dwarf is generally not used since these stars have from 2 to more than 90 times the Sun's mass and surface temperatures that reach over 50,000 F (30,000 C). Other exceptions are white dwarfs — stellar remnants that no longer produce energy in their centers — and brown dwarfs, which are substellar objects incapable of producing energy via the hydrogen fusion processes occurring in main-sequence stars. E Earth The third planet from the Sun and one of four terrestrial planets in the inner solar system. Earth, the only planet where water exists in large quantities, has an atmosphere capable of supporting myriad life forms. The planet is 150 million kilometers (93 million miles) away from the Sun. Earth has one satellite, "the Moon." eccentricity (e) The amount by which an elliptical orbit deviates from a perfect circle, which has an eccentricity of 0. Elliptical orbits have values between 0 and 1, parabolic orbits have a value of exactly 1, and hyperbolic orbits have values exceeding 1. Eccentricity is the ratio of the distance between the focus points and the major axis of the ellipse. Equivalently, the eccentricity is (r a – r p ) / (r a +r p ) , where r a is the apoapsis distance and r p is the periapsis distance. eclipse The total or partial obscuring of one celestial body by another, as when the Moon blocks the Sun during a solar eclipse, or the passage of one celestial body into the shadow of another, as when the Moon passes through Earth's shadow during a lunar eclipse. Orbiting objects such as binary stars or stars with exoplanets will be seen to eclipse their companions once every orbital period if the plane of their orbits lies edge-on toward Earth. eclipse depth The measured decrease in brightness of a system that occurs when one object in the system moves in front or behind the other. For example, the decrease in brightness of a star-planet system that occurs when the planet moves in front of the star (transit or eclipse) or when the planet moves behind the star (secondary eclipse). Eclipse depth is commonly presented in terms of the portion of light that is blocked in percent or parts per million. ecliptic A great circle on the celestial sphere representing the Sun's apparent path during a year (so called because eclipses of the Sun or Moon can occur only when the Moon is close to this path). It is also the plane of Earth's orbit around the Sun. Eddington limit The theoretical maximum luminosity a body, such as a star, can attain when the outward force of its radiation balances the inward force of its gravitational pull. A body exceeding this luminosity will emit an intense outflow (called a stellar wind) from its outer layers. Supernovae, novae, gamma-ray bursts, and accreting black holes in active galaxies can briefly exceed their Eddington luminosities, producing short, intense outflows. Named for English astronomer and physicist Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington (1882-1944). ejecta Material that is material that is forced or thrown out, especially as a result of a volcanic eruption, impact on the surface of a planet or Moon, or stellar explosion. electromagnetic radiation (waves) Light (electromagnetic radiation) in all of its forms, including radio, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays. Electromagnetic radiation moves at the speed of light and is a traveling periodic fluctuation of an electric and magnetic field. These fields oscillate at right angles to each other and to the wave's travel direction. electromagnetic spectrum The full range of frequencies, from radio waves to gamma rays, that characterizes electromagnetic radiation (light). electron A negatively charged particle commonly found in the outer layers of atoms. The electron has only 0.0005 the mass of the proton. electron volt (eV) A unit of energy equal to the work required to accelerate an electron through a potential difference of one volt. In high-energy astrophysics, it is more common to refer to the energy of photons than their corresponding wavelengths. Visible light has energies ranging from 2-3 eV. X-rays have energies thousands of times greater, measured in kiloelectron volts (keV), while gamma rays can be measured in millions (MeV), billions (GeV) and trillions (TeV) of electron volts. These units are also used when referring to the energy of accelerated particles. element A substance made from the same kind of atoms that cannot be chemically interconverted or broken down into simpler substances. Elements are primary constituents of matter, with 118 known. Atoms with the same number of protons (atomic number) in the nucleus have identical chemical properties. Hydrogen and helium are the simplest and most abundant elements in the universe, making up about 74% and 24% of all matter, respectively. Heavier elements — often collectively called "metals" in astronomy — comprise only about 2% of the Milky Way's disk, but their presence can greatly influence astronomical phenomena. elementary particle Particles with no measurable internal structure and thought to be the basic building blocks of the universe. There are elementary fermions (six leptons — including electrons and neutrinos — and six quarks, plus all their antimatter partners) and elementary bosons, which carry forces. Other particles, such as the protons and neutrons in atomic nuclei, are built from two or more quarks. The force carriers are the photon (electromagnetism), the W and Z bosons (the weak force, responsible for radioactive decay), the gluon (the strong force, which binds atomic nuclei together), and the still hypothetical graviton (gravity). Additionally, the Higgs boson, discovered in 2012, gives rise to the masses of elementary particles. ellipse A curve on a plane surrounding two focal points, such that the sum of the distances from both of these points is constant for all points on the curve. A circle is a special type of ellipse where both focal points are located in the same spot. The orbits of the planets are non-circular ellipses, a fact first recognized by German astronomer Johannes Kepler (1571-1630) through analysis of careful observations of Mars collected by the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe (1546-1601). elliptical galaxy A galaxy with a spherical or ellipsoidal shape characterized by little structure, little gas and dust, and populated by older, redder stars than those in spiral galaxies. Astronomers suspect that most elliptical galaxies formed from the collisions and subsequent mergers of spiral galaxies, which are more common than ellipticals. emission The process in which atoms or molecules lose the energy delivered by electromagnetic radiation that strikes them. When an atom is excited to a higher-energy state, it gives off light in order to return to its previous state. emission line spectrum A spectrum consisting of bright lines at certain wavelengths separated by dark regions in which there is no light. emission nebula (plural: nebulae) A cloud of interstellar gas that glows as a result of ultraviolet light from nearby hot, young stars. The process begins when energetic ultraviolet light strips electrons from gas atoms, typically hydrogen, the universe's most abundant element. When electrons again recombine with protons, they commonly emit red light (Hα line; see Balmer series), which provides the prominent reddish color to images of emission nebulae taken in natural light. emitted light Light that is given off by an object or material. Emitted light is light that originates in the object or material itself. The light that we observe from stars is emitted light — light that is generated by the star itself. Light bulbs, fires, and fireflies emit visible light. equatorial coordinates A celestial coordinate system for locating any position in the sky that is tied to Earth's position in space commonly used to locate the positions of astronomical objects. Declination, analogous to latitude on Earth, has values from +90° degrees to -90°, corresponding to the north and south celestial poles, with 0° at the celestial equator. Right ascension, the astronomical equivalent of longitude on Earth, is measured eastward along the celestial equator from the vernal equinox, customarily given in hours, minutes, and seconds, with 24 hours being equivalent to the full circle. Because of the slow wobble of Earth's rotation axis called precession, the equatorial coordinates of a fixed object drift with time, so each position is also tied to a specific year, or epoch. era of reionization (epoch of reionization, EOR) More than 13 billion years ago, the gas between galaxies was largely opaque to energetic light, making it difficult to observe young galaxies. It's not yet known what allowed the universe to become completely ionized, or transparent, which eventually led to the "clear" conditions detected in much of the universe today. erg/sec A form of the metric unit for power. It is equal to 10 –10 kilowatts. See also: scientific notation. European Space Agency (ESA) An intergovernmental organization of 22 European states dedicated to the exploration of space, established in 1975, and headquartered in Paris. ESA maintains and operates the Guiana Space Centre, a major spaceport near Kourou, French Guiana. event horizon The distance from a black hole where the velocity required to escape it equals or exceeds the speed of light, the fastest possible speed known, and from within which nothing can escape. The event horizon is a black hole's "point of no return." excited state A higher-energy state of any molecule, atom, or nucleus relative to its previous lower-energy state or its minimum-energy (ground) state. Excitation is usually brief and quickly followed by the emission of energy (such as photon) and a return to the previous lower-energy state. exoplanet A planet beyond our solar system, typically one orbiting a star. Some exoplanets move freely through space, unbound to a star, and are often called starless, free-floating, or rogue planets. exposure The process of allowing electromagnetic radiation to fall on light-sensitive materials such as photographic films or plates. An exposure is also the image created by the process. A long exposure time is needed in order to obtain an image of dim and distant celestial objects. extragalactic Beyond our own galaxy, the Milky Way. extraterrestrial Beyond Earth. F far-infrared light The region of the infrared spectrum that is closest to microwave or radio light. Far-infrared light has the longest wavelengths and lowest frequencies and energies of any infrared range. Webb's science instruments cannot detect far-infrared light. Fermi acceleration A mechanism to accelerate charged particles to the high energies observed in cosmic rays, proposed in 1949 by Italian-born physicist Enrico Fermi (1901-1954). In a magnetic field, a charged particle moves in a trajectory that wraps around a magnetic field line. Areas of weaker and stronger fields can behave like mirrors, reversing the particle's direction. If the line itself is moving, as in the turbulent shock wave of a supernova, the particle gets an energy boost, like a rubber ball bouncing off of a wall moving toward it. Repeated interactions keep accelerating the particle until it has enough energy to completely escape the magnetic field and freely travel through space. field of view (FOV) The viewing area of a telescope, expressed in degrees, arcminutes, or arcseconds. A telescope able to show the entire disk of the full moon has a field of view at least 30 arcminutes across. Often abbreviated FOV. filter A device that selectively absorbs some colors of light while allowing others to pass through. Astronomers use filters to observe how celestial objects appear in certain colors of light or to reduce the light of exceptionally bright objects. fission A nuclear process that releases energy when heavyweight atomic nuclei break down into lighter nuclei. Fission is the basis of the atomic bomb. fluorescence The emission of light by a substance that has absorbed light or other electromagnetic radiation. Typically, the emitted light has a longer wavelength, and therefore lower energy, than the absorbed radiation. Ions of carbon monoxide (CO) in the gas tails of comets absorb ultraviolet sunlight, then emit bluish light at a wavelength of 420 nm. flux A measure of the amount of energy given off by an astronomical object over a fixed amount of time and area. Because the energy is measured per time and area, flux measurements make it easy for astronomers to compare the relative energy output of objects with very different sizes or ages. frequency A property of a wave that describes how many wave patterns or cycles pass by a fixed point in a given period of time. Frequency is often measured in hertz (Hz), where a wave with a frequency of 1 hertz completes 1 cycle each second. fusion The process in which atomic nuclei collide so fast that they stick together and emit a large amount of energy. In the centers of most stars, hydrogen fuses into helium. The energy emitted by fusion supports the star's enormous mass from collapsing in on itself and causes the star to glow. G galactic center The center of a galaxy. The center of our Milky Way galaxy lies 28,000 light-years away in the direction of the constellation Sagittarius and contains a supermassive black hole. galactic coordinates A celestial coordinate system, analogous to longitude and latitude on Earth, with the Sun as its center, its central longitude aligned with the approximate center of the Milky Way, and its equator parallel to an approximation of the galactic plane but offset to its north (since the Sun lies about 57 light-years north of the actual midplane). It is often used to specify the positions of objects in our galaxy to provide their context relative to other galactic structures. Galactic latitude ranges from -90° to +90° (below and above the galactic plane respectively), and galactic longitude ranges from 0° (the galactic center) to 360° measured eastward from the galactic center along the galactic equator. The galactic equator is inclined by 63 degrees to Earth's equator. galactic halo An extended, roughly spherical galaxy component that extends its main visible features. It includes a low-luminosity stellar halo of typically old stars and globular clusters; hot, ionized gas, a feature called the galactic corona; and dark matter. Stellar halos surround most disk galaxies and some elliptical galaxies. galaxy A collection of stars, gas, dust, and dark matter bound together by gravity. The smallest galaxies may contain only a few hundred thousand stars, while the largest galaxies have thousands of billions. The Milky Way galaxy contains our solar system. Galaxies are classified or grouped by their shape. Round or oval galaxies are elliptical galaxies and those showing a pinwheel structure are spiral galaxies. All others are called irregular because they do not resemble elliptical or spiral galaxies. galaxy cluster Groupings of hundreds to thousands of galaxies and the largest objects in the universe held together by their own gravity. The largest galaxies in the universe, which also host supermassive black holes, are found in the centers of galaxy clusters. The galaxies of a cluster make up only about 5% of its total mass. Hot plasma accounts for another 15% of its mass and makes them bright X-ray sources. The remaining mass is in the form of invisible dark matter. A galaxy cluster’s enormous mass warps the space-time around it, bending the path of more distant light passing through it (called gravitational lensing). This makes galaxy clusters giant telescopes that magnify background galaxies too faint for astronomers to see otherwise. galaxy evolution The study of the formation of the first galaxies, the way galaxies change over time, and the processes that have given rise the variety of structures observed in nearby galaxies. galaxy group The smallest collection of galaxies held together by their own gravity, typically containing a few to a few dozen members. Our Milky Way galaxy is part of the Local Group, which includes two other large spirals (the Andromeda and Triangulum galaxies), their satellites, and numerous other dwarf galaxies. galaxy supercluster A vast collection of smaller galaxy clusters or galaxy groups that can span hundreds of millions of light-years, making them among the largest-known structures in the universe. The Milky Way is part of the Local Group, which in turn is part of the Virgo Supercluster, which is part of the Laniakea Supercluster, which is part of the Pisces-Cetus Supercluster Complex. gamma rays The highest-energy, shortest-wavelength light, usually thought of as any light having energies greater than about 500 keV (hundreds of times the energy of visible light). They can penetrate materials opaque to X-rays. Gamma rays are emitted by some radioactive elements (such as cesium-137 and americium-141) and are produced by various astronomical processes, including cosmic ray interactions, neutron star mergers, and the formation of black holes in collapsing stars. gamma-ray burst (GRB) The most powerful class of explosion in the universe, GRBs are brief, powerful blasts of gamma rays originating in distant galaxies. They occur randomly and can appear anywhere in the sky. In general, longer GRBs occur when a massive star collapses, shorter bursts occur when neutron stars and/or black holes collide. Such events produce high-speed jets of matter that emit gamma rays, which can be detected by satellites when one jet points in Earth's direction. gas One of the three states of matter, in which atoms, molecules, ions, and electrons are far apart and move freely, allowing the substance to expand and fill both the shape and volume of any container. gas giant (Jovian planet) A large planet composed mostly of hydrogen and/or helium. These planets, like Jupiter and Saturn in our solar system, don't have hard surfaces and instead have swirling gases above a solid core. Gas giants can be much larger than Jupiter, and much closer to their stars than anything found in our solar system. general relativity Theories developed by German-born physicist Albert Einstein (1879-1955) that are central to modern science. The special theory of relativity (1905) is based on the principles that all constant, straight-line motion is relative, that light has the same speed in a vacuum for all observers, and that space-time is a four-dimensional continuum. From it emerged the equivalence of matter (m) and energy (E) as described by the famous equation E=mc 2 , where c is the speed of light. The general theory of relativity (1916) extends the special theory to systems that are accelerating with respect to one another, covering gravitation and the curvature of space-time. It predicted the existence of black holes, gravitational waves, and gravitational lensing. giant molecular cloud (GMC) A cold, dense cloud primarily composed of hydrogen molecules that blocks all visible light behind it. Most star formation occurs within these clouds, which can sport temperatures below -280 F (-180 C) and span several hundred light-years. giant star An evolved star. Giant stars are brighter and have a larger radius than main sequence stars of the same temperature. They have exhausted their hydrogen fuel to fuse in their cores, which puffs up their outer layers. globular cluster A large collection of old stars closely packed in a roughly spherical shape. They can contain hundreds of thousands to millions of stars, including some of the oldest yet observed, in a ball typically less than 300 light-years across. The Milky Way hosts at least 150 globular clusters. granite A light-colored igneous rock made of silica-rich minerals like quartz and feldspar. Earth's continents are granitic in composition, with a mineral and chemical composition similar to granite. gravitational clustering The process by which a large-scale structure grows as its gravity attracts smaller building blocks. Astronomers believe that all the large-scale structures (such as galaxies, galaxy clusters, and galaxy superclusters) that we see in the universe today formed through gravitational clustering. gravitational collapse When a massive body collapses under its own weight. For example, interstellar clouds collapse to become stars until the onset of nuclear fusion stops the collapse. gravitational lensing A phenomenon where a concentration of matter, such as a star or a galaxy cluster, distorts and magnifies the light of more distant objects passing through it. Einstein's general theory of relativity describes how masses distort the space-time around them. Light from more distant objects passing through this region must travel through the distorted space-time. This allows astronomers to detect planets around stars that would otherwise be undetectable (microlensing), and on larger scales allows researchers to study the details of galaxies that would otherwise be too far away to be seen with current telescopes. gravitational waves Ripples in space-time caused by the acceleration of massive objects. The first directly detected sources include binary systems where orbiting black holes or neutron stars merged together. Gravitational waves are also thought to emanate from the motion of matter during the big bang. gravitationally bound Objects held in orbit about each other by their gravitational attraction. For example, satellites in orbit around Earth are gravitationally bound to it because they can't escape Earth's gravity. By contrast, the Voyager spacecraft were launched with enough energy to escape the Sun's gravity and hence are not gravitationally bound. gravity The universal force of attraction between all bodies of matter. The more massive the object, the stronger its gravitational attraction. The gravitational force between objects diminishes with the inverse square of the distance between them, so if their distance is doubled, the force weakens to one-fourth its original strength. Gravity is the weakest of the four fundamental forces in nature. H habitable zone The range of orbits around a star where a planetary surface can support liquid water given sufficient atmospheric temperature and pressure; sometimes referred to as the Goldilocks zone (the extent that's "just right" for the presence of water). Since liquid water is a key ingredient for life as we know it, exoplanets in other stars' habitable zones become compelling places to search for life. Scientists estimate that the present-day habitable zone of the solar system extends from about 10% closer to the Sun than Earth's orbit to 50% beyond it (0.9 to 1.5 AU); it may have been larger in the past, when the young Sun was more luminous. Mars is on the outer edge of the present-day habitable zone, making it a compelling planet in the search for evidence of past life. Since the habitable zone definition only applies to a planet's surface, liquid water below the surface may exist well beyond a star's formal habitable zone, such as the internal ocean under the crust of Jupiter's moon Europa. hadron A subatomic particle that experiences the strong interaction and is built from two or more quarks, including baryons (such as protons and neutrons) and mesons. All observed subatomic particles are hadrons except for the force-carriers of the fundamental interactions (gauge bosons) and leptons (which includes electrons and neutrinos). Hawking radiation A theory first proposed in 1974 by British physicist Stephen Hawking (1942-2018) holding that, due to a combination of properties of quantum mechanics and general relativity, black holes emit radiation in the form of light or other particles from near their event horizons. Hawking showed that the amount of energy released by a black hole in this way is inversely proportional to its mass, which means that the higher the black hole’s mass, the smaller its energy release and temperature (Hawking temperature). A black hole of the Sun's mass might have a temperature of 100-millionth of a kelvin (10 -8 K), with more massive black holes being even colder. If matter or energy does not enter to offset the emission of Hawking radiation, a black hole's mass and the diameter of its event horizon gradually shrinks until it vanishes in a final flash of radiation. For a black hole the mass of the Sun, the time for evaporation is enormous — 10 64 years, which is far greater than the current age of the universe. The cosmic microwave background, which has a higher temperature than such black holes, provides photons to them that will offset losses by Hawking radiation until cosmic expansion cools the universe below the black holes' Hawking temperature. helium The second-lightest element, symbol He, and second-most abundant element in the observable universe, after hydrogen. Helium was formed in the early universe and is responsible for about 24% of the total mass of elements. Today, helium forms as a result of the hydrogen fusion process occurring in stars. A neutral helium atom has a nucleus containing two protons and, usually, two neutrons, together with two electrons orbiting the nucleus. Some elements (uranium, thorium, radium, etc.) emit helium nuclei (called alpha particles) as part of their radioactive decay. hertz (Hz) A unit of frequency, defined as a frequency of 1 cycle per second, named for Heinrich Hertz (1857-1894), who first demonstrated the existence of electromagnetic waves. For higher frequencies, the unit is commonly expressed in multiples: a thousand (kilohertz, kHz), a million, (megahertz, MHz), a billion (gigahertz, GHz), and a trillion (terahertz, THz). horizontal coordinate system A celestial coordinate system that uses the observer's local horizon as a reference plane to define the position of a point on the celestial sphere at a given time by its angular distance above the horizon (altitude) and the angular distance measured east from north and parallel to the horizon (azimuth); also called the alt/az system. Altitude ranges from 0° at the horizon to 90° at the zenith. Azimuth ranges from 0° (due north), to 90° (due east), to 180° (due south), and 270° (due west). Because the system is fixed to the rotating Earth and not the stars, the coordinates of an object change with time. hot Jupiter A class of gas giant exoplanets thought to have properties similar to Jupiter but that orbit their stars in less than 10 days. Such close distances to their host stars result in high surface temperatures, hence the name. The first confirmed exoplanet orbiting a main-sequence star, discovered in 1995, is the hot Jupiter 51 Pegasi b, now officially named Dimidium, which orbits its star every 4.2 days. Hubble constant (H o ) A number that expresses the rate at which the universe expands with time. Its value is measured to be between 60 and 75 kilometers per second per megaparsec. It is named for American astronomer Edwin Hubble (1889-1953). Hubble's law A relationship between a galaxy's distance from us and its velocity through space, which is interpreted as evidence of the expanding universe. The farther away a galaxy lies from us, the faster it's receding away from us. It is named for American astronomer Edwin Hubble (1889-1953). hydrogen The lightest smallest atom, symbol H. Hydrogen formed in the early universe and is its most abundant element, making up about 75% of its normal matter. A hydrogen atom consists of just one proton and one electron. I ice giant A giant planet that typically has an atmosphere dominated by hydrogen and helium, and a core made up of rock and heavier metals. The ice giants in our solar system are Uranus and Neptune, which are primarily made of oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur. implosion A sudden, violent collapse. When the core of a massive star runs out of fuel, there is no longer any force countering its own gravity, so the core collapses under its own weight. This implosion may create a neutron star or black hole and generate an outward-moving shock wave that forms a supernova, heating and ejecting the overlying gas layers. inclination The angle between the orbital plane of a planet, comet, or other body, and the ecliptic. The angle between the orbital plane of a moon or satellite and the equatorial plane of its primary; the Moon's orbit is inclined 5.16° to Earth's equator. For orbiting systems beyond the solar system, such as those hosting exoplanets or multiple stars, the angle of the orbital plane relative to the plane of the sky, that is, a plane perpendicular to the line of sight from Earth, with 0° being face on and 90° being edge on. infrared Invisible light that we sense as radiant heat, with longer wavelengths (0.78 microns to 1 mm) and lower frequencies and energies than visible light. In astronomy, it is subdivided into three regions: the near infrared (nearest to visible light) ranges from 0.78 to about 2.5 microns; the mid-infrared spans 2.5 to 50 microns; and the far infrared includes wavelengths from 50 to 1,000 microns. (Although some astronomers place the cutoff at 300 microns.) Water vapor absorbs a significant amount of infrared and the atmosphere itself glows at these wavelengths, but some regions can be observed by telescopes atop mountains or aboard high-altitude aircraft, balloons, or rockets where they are above most of the atmosphere's water vapor. The entire infrared range can be detected by observatories in space. infrared telescope An instrument that collects the infrared radiation emitted by celestial objects. There are several Earth- and space-based infrared observatories. interacting galaxies (colliding galaxies) Two or more galaxies that pass close enough to gravitationally disrupt each other's shapes. The collision rips streamers of stars from the galaxies, fuels an explosion of star formation, and can ultimately result in both galaxies merging into one. intermediate-mass black holes This black hole is estimated to have a mass between 100 and 1,000 solar masses. No single star could ever form such a heavy black hole. Instead, researchers suggest these black holes form either by devouring lots of material or individual black holes merge. interstellar dust Small particles of solid matter, similar to smoke, in the space between stars. Interstellar dust reflects and reddens visible starlight, and in large quantities absorbs ultraviolet light. Longer wavelengths of infrared light can penetrate interstellar dust. interstellar medium A collective term for the gas (in ionized, atomic, and molecular form), dust particles, light, and cosmic rays located between the stars of a galaxy. invisible radiation Forms of light (electromagnetic radiation) that human eyes cannot detect, including gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet light, infrared light, microwaves, and radio waves. ion An atom with one or more electrons removed (or added), giving the atom a net positive (or negative) charge. Gases including large numbers of such atoms are said to be ionized. ionization The process by which ions are produced, typically by collisions with other atoms or electrons, or by absorption of electromagnetic radiation. ionosphere A region of Earth's upper atmosphere containing abundant ions and free electrons mainly formed by ultraviolet light and X-rays from the Sun. The term is also used to describe corresponding regions above the surfaces of other planets. The ionosphere is important because it reflects and modifies radio waves used for communication and navigation. More precisely, the ionosphere consists of three distinct regions, known as the D, E, and F layers, embedded within standard atmospheric layers called the mesosphere and the thermosphere. The D layer ranges from about 60 km (37 miles) to 90 km (56 miles) altitude, the E region extends from around 90 km (56 miles) up to 150 km (93 miles) high, and the F layer ranges from altitudes of about 150 km to up to 600 km (373 miles). The height, fraction of ionized particles, and even the existence of these regions varies over time, with significant differences between day and night, as well as over the course of the Sun's 11-year sunspot cycle. irregular galaxy A galaxy that appears disorganized and disordered, without a distinct spiral or elliptical shape. Irregular galaxies are usually rich in interstellar matter, such as dust and gas. The Large and Small Magellanic Clouds are examples of nearby irregular galaxies. isolated planetary-mass object An object that has the mass of a planet, but does not orbit a star. Some isolated planetary-mass objects are probably brown dwarfs, while others could be free-floating planets. The term is typically used when researchers are not certain how to classify the object. J Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) The Japanese national aerospace and space agency, formed in 2003 through the merger of three previously independent organizations. JAXA operates the Tanegashima Space Center, the nation's largest spaceport. jets Narrow, high-energy streams of gas and other particles generally ejected in two opposite directions from some central source. Jets appear to originate in the vicinity of an extremely dense object, such as a black hole, pulsar, or protostar, with a surrounding accretion disk. The jets are thought to emerge perpendicular to the plane of the accretion disk. In active galaxies and gamma-ray bursts, the jets contain beams of particles moving near the speed of light and emit gamma rays. K Kelvin temperature scale (K) A kelvin is the fundamental measure temperature. Water freezes at 273 kelvins (not degrees), which equals 32 degrees Fahrenheit or 0 degrees Celsius. The scale is frequently used in science and is named for the Scottish physicist Sir William Thompson (1824-1907, also known as Lord Kelvin), who devised it in 1848. A change of 1 kelvin (1 K) is the same magnitude as a temperature change of 1 C, but the Kelvin scale measures from absolute zero, the coldest possible temperature. The boiling point of water is 373 K (212 F or 100 CF), and the Sun's effective temperature is 5,772 K (9,930 F or 5,499 C). Kepler's laws A set of three scientific laws describing the motion of planets around the Sun published by Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), a German astronomer and mathematician. They define the shape of planetary orbits, explain how a planet's velocity changes during an orbit, and relate a planet's orbital period to its distance from the Sun. All planets move along elliptical orbits with the Sun located at one focus. During each orbit, a line connecting a planet with the Sun sweeps out equal areas in equal time intervals. The square of the planet's orbital period (P) is proportional to the cube of its semimajor axis (a, or half the longest width of its elliptical orbit): P 2 ∝ a 3 . kilogram (kg) The fundamental unit of mass in the sciences. One kilogram is equivalent to 1,000 grams or about 2.2 pounds; the mass of a liter of water. kilonova A transient astronomical event following the merger of two compact objects, either two neutron stars or a neutron star and a black hole. The expanding debris generates ultraviolet, visible, and infrared light from heating supplied by the decay of radioactive elements heavier than iron that formed during the merger. Kilonovae are about 1,000 times brighter than novae and about 1,000 times less bright than supernovae. These elements form via rapid neutron capture (called the r-process), which is responsible for the creation (nucleosynthesis) of approximately half of the atomic nuclei heavier than iron, including platinum and gold. Current models suggest that a single neutron star merger event may produce several Earth masses of gold alone. On Aug. 17, 2017, the neutron star merger GW170817 was detected via both gravitational waves and, within two seconds, a gamma-ray burst — the first detection of light from any gravitational wave source and a confirmation of the link between such mergers and short gamma-ray bursts. The associated kilonova was extensively studied and represents the first direct observation of r-process nucleosynthesis in the cosmos. kinematics Often referred to as the "geometry of motion," the term refers to the calculation or description of the underlying mechanics of motion of an astronomical object. For example, in radioastronomy, spectral line graphs are used to determine the kinematics or relative motions of material at the center of a galaxy or surrounding a star as it is born. Kirchhoff's spectroscopy laws Rules that describe the kinds of spectra seen based on the state, density, and temperature of a substance. Named for the German physicist Gustav Robert Kirchhoff (1824-1887), who summarized these relationships in 1859. A hot object or dense gas will emit radiation and produce a continuous spectrum. A hot, low-density gas in front of a cooler background will emit radiation at a discrete set of isolated wavelengths (an emission-line spectrum). A continuous spectrum viewed through a cool, low-density gas will absorb light from the background source at discrete wavelengths (an absorption-line spectrum). Kuiper Belt (object) A region in our outer solar system where many "short-period" comets originate. The orbits of short-period comets are less than 200 years. This region begins near Neptune's orbit at 30 astronomical units (AU) and extends to about 50 AU away from the Sun. An astronomical unit is the average distance between Earth and the Sun. The Kuiper Belt may have as many as 100 million comets. L Lagrange points One of five locations (denoted L1 through L5) in the vicinity of two massive bodies (such as Earth and the Moon) where a third body, such as an asteroid or spacecraft, can remain. The Sun-Earth L1 point, a location used by spacecraft monitoring the Sun, is about 930,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) closer to the Sun than Earth. Sun-Earth L2, located at the same distance in the opposite direction, is used by the James Webb Space Telescope and other astronomy missions. Perhaps as many as a million asteroids have collected in the Sun-Jupiter L4 and L5 points; called trojan asteroids, they occupy two regions that lead and follow the planet by 60 as it orbits. laser A device that can emit a very intense, narrow, parallel beam of highly monochromatic and coherent light by using light to stimulate excited atoms or molecules to emit more light of the same wavelength and phase. Natural lasers have been found where irradiated planetary or stellar gases similarly amplify light, such as in the atmospheres of Mars, Venus, and the edge-on disk of the binary system MWC 349. Similar phenomena occurring at microwave wavelengths are called masers. light Without qualification, the common term for electromagnetic radiation, usually referring to that portion visible to the human eye (visible light). However, other forms of electromagnetic radiation are often referred to as different forms of light. light curve A graph showing how the brightness of an object, such as a star or galaxy, varies over time. light-year A unit of length equal to the distance light travels in a year. In a vacuum, light travels at 671 million mph (1.1 billion kph), so 1 light-year equals about 5.8 trillion miles (9.5 trillion kilometers). limb The edge of the apparent disk of a celestial body. Local group The group of galaxies that includes our Milky Way, the Andromeda galaxy (M31), the Triangulum galaxy (M33), all their satellite galaxies, and numerous other dwarf galaxies. Some 80 members are currently recognized. luminosity The total amount of energy radiated into space every second by a star, galaxy, or other celestial object. Lyman lines A set of ultraviolet emission or absorption lines in the spectrum of hydrogen that arise from electron transitions between the atom's ground, or lowest energy, state and those at higher energies, discovered by the American physicist Theodore Lyman IV (1874–1954). The first three lines are identified by combining Lyman with the spelled-out name of the first Greek letters — alpha, beta, or gamma — or by combining the abbreviation Ly with the respective lowercase Greek letter — α, β, or γ. The Lyman-alpha line (121.56 nm) is of particular importance in cosmology, where it can be used to identify and confirm the distances of galaxies with high redshifts, to measure how galaxies and the gases within and surrounding them evolve, and to probe reionization. M Magellanic Clouds Two irregular galaxies that share a gaseous envelope and orbit each other and our Milky Way galaxy. They lie about 21° apart in the southern sky near the south celestial pole and are visible to the unaided eye from the Southern Hemisphere. The closest of the pair, the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) is located about 163,000 light-years away and measures about 32,000 light-years across, about twice the size of its companion. On February 24, 1987, supernova 1987A — the closest supernova seen in more than 400 years and the only one from which neutrinos have been detected — exploded in the LMC. The Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) lies about 206,000 light-years away and is about 18,000 light-years across. They have undergone tidal interactions with the Milky Way and with each other and remain valuable laboratories for studying star formation, stellar evolution, and galaxy formation. While studying variable stars in the SMC, Henrietta Leavitt (1868-1921) discovered the period-luminosity relation for Cepheids, which remains an important tool for establishing cosmic distances. The LMC and SMC were named for the Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan (1480-1521), whose crew brought them to the attention of European astronomers following the first voyage around the world (1519-1522). magnetar A type of neutron star possessing an unusually intense magnetic field between 100 and 1,000 times stronger than that of a typical pulsar. Astronomers have identified 30 magnetars. magnetic field A description of the strength of the magnetic force exerted by an object. Bar magnets have dipolar fields, as the force is exerted from the two ends of the bar. In simple terms, Earth, the Sun, and stars have dipolar magnetic fields. magnetic pole Either of two limited regions in a magnet at which the magnet's field is most intense. The two regions have opposing polarities, which we label "north" and "south," after the two magnetic poles on Earth. magnetosphere The region of space in which the magnetic field of an object (e.g., a star or planet) dominates the radiation pressure of the stellar wind to which it is exposed. magnetotail The portion of a planetary magnetosphere which is pushed in the direction of the solar wind. magnitude The degree of brightness of a celestial body designated on a numerical scale, on which the brightest star has magnitude -1.4 and the faintest star visible without a telescope is of magnitude 6. A decrease of one magnitude represents an increase in apparent brightness by a factor of 2.512; also called apparent magnitude. main asteroid belt A formal name for the asteroids that lie between Mars and Jupiter. They are airless rocks that failed to adhere to one another to become larger bodies as the solar system was forming 4.6 billion years ago. main sequence star A star that produces energy primarily by fusing hydrogen to helium in its core, as does the Sun. Main sequence stars, also called dwarfs, make up around 90% of the stars in the universe. They range in luminosity, color, and mass — from 8% to 200 times the Sun’s — and remain in this stage for most of their lives, billions of years in the case of the Sun, millions of years for stars at the high-end of the mass range. mass The quantity of matter an object contains, as measured by its acceleration under a given force or by the force exerted on it by a gravitational field. matter Any substance that occupies space and has mass. megaparsec (Mpc) Equals one million parsecs (3.26 million light-years) and is the unit of distance commonly used to measure the distance between galaxies. megaton A unit of energy typically used to describe the yield of nuclear warheads, equivalent to the explosive force of 1 million tons of TNT. The explosion associated with the meteor airburst of the Tunguska event in 1908 has been estimated at between 3 and 50 megatons. The impact of fragment G of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter in 1994 was estimated to have released an energy equivalent of 6 million megatons. meson [MEH-zon, MEE-zon] An unstable subatomic particle in the hadron family composed of a quark and an antiquark. More than 200 types are known, and all decay in less than one ten-millionth (10 –7 ) of a second. Mesons were predicted in 1935 by the Japanese physicist Yukawa Hideki (1907-1981). The first to be discovered, the charged pions, were found through cosmic ray interactions in 1947. metal In astronomy, any element heavier than helium. Metallicity is the abundance of heavy elements in celestial objects. meter (m) The fundamental SI unit of length, defined as the length traveled by light in vacuum during a period of 1/299,792,458th of a second, and equal to 39.37 inches. A kilometer (km) is equal to 1,000 meters (0.6214 miles). methane A chemical compound consisting of one atom of carbon and four of hydrogen (CH4). On Earth, methane is a gas produced both naturally and through human activity, but it is also common elsewhere in the solar system. The atmospheres of Uranus and Neptune have 2% and 1.5% methane, respectively. Saturn's moon Titan, the largest moon in the solar system and the only one with a dense atmosphere, also contains methane in its atmosphere, and methane rain even pools into lakes on its surface. In interstellar space, frozen methane is one of the ten most abundant ices detected, and methane gas has also been detected in the atmospheres of exoplanets. metric system The decimal measuring system based on the meter, liter, and gram as units of length, capacity, weight or mass, and time. The system was first proposed by the French astronomer and mathematician Gabriel Mouton (1618–1694) in 1670 and was standardized in France in the 1790s.The modern International System of Units (SI) derives from and extends the metric system. micron (µm) A unit of length equal to one millionth of a meter (0.000001 meters, or 10 -6 meters). A micron is equal to 1,000 nanometers. Also called a micrometer. microquasar An object of stellar mass in our own or a nearby galaxy that displays in miniature some of the properties of distant quasars, including radio jets and strong emission across a broad range of wavelengths from radio to X-rays. A microquasar is a binary system that pairs a black hole with a normal star. Matter pulled from the companion forms a hot, X-ray emitting accretion disk around the black hole. Narrow streams (jets) of subatomic particles blast outward from the inner part of the disk at substantial fractions of the speed of light, generating strong radio wave emission. microwave Non-visible light with wavelengths between 1 millimeter and 30 centimeters, between shorter infrared and longer radio regions in the electromagnetic spectrum. mid-infrared light The region of the infrared spectrum that is between near-infrared and far-infrared light. Mid-infrared light has longer wavelengths and lower frequencies and energies than both visible and near-infrared light. Webb's Mid-Infrared Imager (MIRI) detects wavelengths ranging from 5 to 28 microns. Milky Way (galaxy) The galaxy in which Earth resides. The Milky Way is a barred spiral galaxy with a diameter estimated at about 100,000 light-years and a main disk about 1,000 light-years thick. It contains 100 to 400 billion stars and is estimated to hold at least as many planets. At its center is a supermassive black hole named Sagittarius A* that contains about 4.3 million solar masses. The faintly luminous band encircling the celestial sphere formed from numerous stars too faint to be seen individually. It corresponds to our galaxy's central plane, in which most of its stars are located. molecule Two or more atoms bound together, either by sharing electrons (covalent bond) or by the electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged ions (ionic bond). For example, water (H 2 O) has two hydrogen atoms bound to one oxygen atom. A molecule is the smallest fundamental unit of a chemical compound that can take part in the compound's characteristic chemical reactions. momentum A quantity equal to an object’s mass multiplied by its velocity that is always conserved in closed physical systems. The speed of two objects colliding head-on, for example, will change as a result of the impact, but their total momentum before and after the collision will remain the same. Even light and other electromagnetic radiation has momentum, defined as Planck's constant divided by its wavelength. Angular momentum is a related concept applying to rotating systems. moon A large body orbiting a planet. On Earth's only moon, scientists have not detected life, water, or oxygen on this heavily cratered body. The Moon orbits our planet in about 28 days. muon An elementary particle similar to the electron but 207 times heavier. Muons are leptons with a negative charge, and their antimatter partner (antimuons) have the same mass and spin but a positive charge. Muons are the chief constituent of cosmic radiation at Earth's surface. Muons reaching Earth are formed in the atmosphere when high-energy protons and atomic nuclei moving near the speed of light (cosmic rays) collide with air molecules. Muons exist for only 2.2 microseconds before decaying into an electron and two kinds of neutrinos, but because they move at nearly the speed of light, they travel far and can deeply penetrate Earth's surface — hundreds of meters or more — before decaying. Some 10,000 muons strike every square meter of the Earth's surface each minute. N nanometer (nm) A unit of length in the International System of Units (SI), equal to one billionth (10 −9 ) of a meter. It is often used to express dimensions on an atomic scale, such as the diameter of a helium atom (0.06 nm), and to specify the wavelength of visible light, which ranges from 400 to 700 nm. NASA A federal agency created on July 29, 1958, after President Dwight Eisenhower signed the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. NASA coordinates space exploration efforts and conducts aeronautical research. near-infrared light The region of the infrared spectrum that is closest to visible light. Near-infrared light has slightly longer wavelengths and slightly lower frequencies and energies than visible light. Webb's near-infrared instruments (NIRCam, NIRISS, and NIRSpec) detect wavelengths between 0.6 and 5 microns, which includes orange and red visible light as well as the full range of near-infrared light. nebula (plural: nebulae) A cloud of dust and gas located between or around stars. neutrino The most abundant particle with mass in the universe. Neutrinos have extremely small masses (less than a millionth that of an electron), are electrically neutral (unaffected by magnetic fields), and travel at almost the speed of light. Their neutral charge makes them important cosmic “messengers.” Since they are unaffected by magnetic fields, scientists can trace them straight back to their sources, unlike cosmic rays. They come in three "flavors" and can change from one to another as they travel. Neutrinos are difficult to study because they interact so rarely with other matter that trillions of them pass through our bodies each second without leaving a trace. But this means they can escape dense, opaque environments — like the core of a star — that light cannot. Neutrinos have been detected from the Sun, from a supernova (SN 1987A), and from a distant blazar during a powerful flare (TXS 0506+056). neutron An electrically neutral particle slightly more massive than a proton, commonly found in the nuclei of all atoms other than hydrogen. neutron star The compact remnant core of a massive star that exploded as a supernova. Neutron stars host more than the Sun's mass in a ball about 12 miles (20 kilometers) across. Neutron stars are the second-smallest and second-densest class of compact objects known, surpassed only by black holes. Neutron stars are thought to be composed almost entirely of neutrons because extreme pressure causes the electrons and protons present in normal matter to merge, forming additional neutrons. Neutron stars may be isolated or members of binary systems, and can be observed as radio pulsars, X-ray or gamma-ray pulsars, millisecond pulsars, X-ray bursters, and magnetars. Newton's law of universal gravitation Every mass attracts every other mass by a force acting along the line intersecting them. The force of this mutual attraction is proportional to the product of the two masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. Named for English physicist Sir Isaac Newton (1643-1727), who derived it. Newton's laws of motion Three fundamental laws of classical physics developed by English physicist and mathematician Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1727). A body continues in its state of constant velocity (which may be zero) unless it is acted upon by an external force. For an unbalanced force acting on a body, the acceleration produced is proportional to the force impressed; the constant of proportionality is the inertial mass of the body. In a system where no external forces are present, every acting force is always opposed by another of equal magnitude in the opposite direction. noise Random fluctuations that are always associated with a measurement that is repeated many times over. Noise appears in astronomical images as fluctuations in the image background. These fluctuations do not represent any real sources of light in the sky, but rather are caused by the imperfections of the telescope. If the noise is too high, it may obscure the dimmest objects within the field of view. nova (plural: novae) A star that experiences a sudden, temporary outburst that increases its luminosity by up to 100,000 times. Novae originate from eruptions on the surfaces of white dwarf stars in close binary systems. nuclear fission A reaction in which the nucleus of a heavy element splits spontaneously or on impact with another particle, creating lighter nuclei with the release of energy. Nuclear power plants generate electricity through such reactions. nuclear fusion A process whereby several small nuclei combine to make a larger one whose mass is slightly smaller than the sum of the small ones. The difference in mass is converted to energy by Einstein's famous equivalence E = mc 2 . This is the source of the Sun's energy. nucleosynthesis The creation of new atomic nuclei, either by combining two smaller nuclei (fusion) or by breaking a larger nucleus into multiple smaller ones (fission). Nucleosynthesis first occurred in the first minutes of the big bang and continues today within stars (including the Sun) and other cosmic sources. In the early universe, protons (the hydrogen nucleus) and neutrons combined to make nuclei of deuterium, an isotope of hydrogen. Deuterium nuclei then fused together to make helium nuclei. Further reactions produced lithium. Nuclear reactions within stars and during explosive events at the ends of their lives (such as mergers and supernovae) have formed most of the other nuclei in the universe. nucleus (plural: nuclei) [NOO-klee-us, NOO-klee-eye] The positively charged core of an atom, composed of protons and (usually) neutrons, that makes up nearly all of its mass and around which electrons orbit. The bright central emitting region of active galaxies (AGN). The solid body of a comet. O observable universe The portion of the entire universe that can be seen from Earth. observatory A structure designed and equipped for making astronomical observations. Observatories are located on Earth and in space. occultation The concealment of one celestial body by another passing between it and an observer. The Moon may occult a planet or star, for example. Oort cloud This is the most distant region of our solar system and is theorized to be a giant spherical shell made of icy pieces of space debris. The Oort Cloud might contain billions, or even trillions, of objects. It ranges from less than half a light-year (about 2,000 AU) to over 1 (10,000 AU) light-year from the Sun. This is where long-period comets originate in our solar system. opacity A property of matter that prevents light from passing through it. The opacity of a given material, such as a layer in a star's atmosphere, depends on its chemical composition (some elements absorb light more easily than others), its temperature, and its density. open cluster Also known as a galactic cluster, an open cluster consists of numerous young stars that formed at the same time within a large cloud of interstellar dust and gas. Open clusters are located in the spiral arms or the disks of galaxies. The Pleiades is an example of an open cluster. orbit The regularly repeated elliptical course of a celestial object or spacecraft about a star, planet, or moon; a complete circuit around an orbited body; or the state of being in or moving in an orbit. The path of an electron around an atomic nucleus. organic compound (molecule) An organic molecule is normally found in living systems. They are made up of at least one carbon, attached to oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, or another element. P pair production The physical process whereby a gamma-ray photon, usually through an interaction with the electromagnetic field of an atomic nucleus, produces an electron and an anti-electron (positron). The original photon no longer exists, its energy having gone into the two resulting particles. The inverse process, pair annihilation, creates two gamma-ray photons from the mutual destruction of an electron/positron pair. parallax The apparent motion of a relatively close object compared to a more distant background as the location of the observer changes. Astronomically, it is half the angle a star appears to move as Earth orbits from one side of the Sun to the other. parsec A unit equal to the distance needed for an object to have a parallax of 1 arcsecond, equal to 3.262 light-years. A kiloparsec (kpc) equals 1,000 parsecs. A megaparsec (Mpc) equals 1 million parsecs. particle accelerator Any natural process or device that can accelerate charged particles, such as electrons, positrons, or protons to speeds approaching that of light. Examples include thunderstorms, the Large Hadron Collider in Switzerland, and the shock waves of supernovae. periapsis The closest point in the path of an orbiting body; its opposite is apoapsis. The concept has special names in commonly used systems: periastron, for a body orbiting a star perigee, for a body orbiting Earth perijove, for a body orbiting Jupiter perihelion, of a body orbiting the Sun period The time interval between successive occurrences of the same state in a cyclic phenomenon, such as a wave, rotation, vibration, or brightness changes in a light curve. In astronomy, it commonly refers to the time taken by a celestial object to rotate around its axis or to make one circuit of its orbit around another body. phase Regularly occurring changes in the appearance of the Moon or a planet. Phases of the Moon include new, full, crescent, first quarter, gibbous, and third quarter. phase curve A graph that shows the change in observed brightness of a star-planet system as the planet orbits the star. A phase curve is a type of light curve that includes the entire orbit and therefore all phases of the planet. (A planet's phase is the portion of its dayside that faces the telescope.) Phase curves can be used to figure out how a planet's surface or atmosphere varies with longitude. photodissociation The breakdown of molecules into their component atoms due to the absorption of light. In the photodissociation region in the Orion Nebula known as the Orion Bar, for example, ultraviolet light from young, massive stars strongly influences the gas chemistry of its regions and acts as the most important source of heat. This intense flood of radiation violently breaks apart molecules, ionizes atoms and molecules by stripping their electrons, and heats the gas and dust. photoelectric effect A phenomenon in which electrically charged particles (typically electrons) are released from or within a material when it absorbs light; it is the principle that makes solar cells work. The details of the interaction cannot be explained by the classical view of light as an electromagnetic wave. The effect was explained in 1905 by Albert Einstein (1879-1955), who postulated that light is made up of particles called photons. Light with a frequency below a certain threshold, at any intensity, will not trigger the effect, but above that frequency, electrons are emitted in proportion to the intensity of incident light (the number of photons striking the surface). Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize for physics in 1921 for this explanation. photometry Measurement of the properties of light, especially its luminous intensity and how it changes over time. Transit photometry is a method to detect exoplanets by measuring the change in a star's brightness as an orbiting planet passes in front of it. photon An elementary particle representing the smallest amount (a quantum) of light and the carrier (gauge boson) of the electromagnetic force. Photons have zero rest mass, no electrical charge, always travel in a vacuum at the speed of light, and carry energy equal to their radiation frequency multiplied by Planck's constant. photon splitting A process in which a single very high-energy gamma-ray photon can borrow energy from an external source, such as a strong magnetic field, and split into two lower-energy photons. pi (π) [pie] A mathematical constant, approximately equal to 22/7 or 3.14159, that is the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter. It is an irrational number — meaning that it cannot be expressed exactly as a ratio of two integers — so its decimal representation neither ends nor enters a repeating pattern. pion [PIE-on] Any of three unstable particles — the π + , π - , and π 0 — making up the lightest mesons. The charged pions (π + , π - ) are antiparticles and were discovered in 1947 through cosmic ray collisions in Earth's atmosphere. The neutral pion (π0), discovered in 1950, is its own antiparticle. While charged pions decay into muons and neutrinos, the neutral pion decays into a pair of gamma rays, making it important in high-energy astrophysics. Planck constant (h), equation, law A fundamental constant that defines the quantum nature of energy. It relates the energy (E) of a photon, the quantum of electromagnetic radiation, to its frequency (ν) through the equation E = hν (the Planck equation). Its value is defined as 6.62607015 x 10 -34 joules per hertz. Named for German theoretical physicist Max Planck (1858-1947), the constant was formulated as part of his work to mathematically describe the frequency pattern emitted by a blackbody when there is no net flow of matter or energy (now known as Planck's law). The law describes how, with increasing temperature, the total radiated energy of a body increases and the peak of its emitted spectrum shifts to shorter wavelengths. planet An object that orbits a star. Although smaller than stars, planets are relatively large and shine only by reflected light. Planets are mostly made up of rock or gas surrounding a small, solid core. In our solar system, the inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars) are the rocky objects, and the outer planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune) are the gaseous ones. Planets beyond our solar system are also called exoplanets. planetary nebula Expanding shells of gas ejected from stars like our Sun at the ends of their lives. The gas is ionized by the remaining hot stellar core, a white dwarf, and emits light in the process. The misleading name originates from the round planet-like appearance of these nebulae as seen through early telescopes. planetary ring (ringed planet, ring system) A disk or ring orbiting an astronomical object that is composed of solid material such as dust and moonlets, and is a common component of satellite systems around giant planets. planetesimal A solid object arising from the accretion of other orbiting objects composed of rocks, dust, and ices via gravitational forces. Planetesimals correspond to objects larger than approximately 1 kilometer (0.6 miles) in circumstellar disks like the one from which the solar system's planets formed, and they are regarded as the building blocks of planets. plasma Often regarded as the fourth state of matter, it is the universe's most abundant form of ordinary matter and makes up the Sun and most stars. It is an ionized gas, typically at low pressure (as in the upper atmosphere or fluorescent lamps) or at very high temperature (as in stars), consisting of positive ions and free electrons in proportions resulting in more or less no overall electric charge. Its properties, in particular its sensitivity to external and internal electric and magnetic fields, allow plasmas to spontaneously form complex, intermittent structures across a wide range of spatial scales, making it a distinct form of matter. pointing The act or process of directing a telescope to a sky position or the precision of a telescope's ability to be directed to a particular sky coordinate. polarization The state of transverse waves in which the wave vibrations have been restricted, or the action of such restriction. In astronomy, polarization carries information about the processes that emitted light, its interaction with magnetic fields, and the shape of the source. Light reflected by a shiny surface generally obtains a degree of horizontal polarization, and filters in polarized sunglasses reduce reflected glare by blocking horizontally polarized light. Like all forms of light, gravitational waves also exhibit polarization. positron An elementary particle with the same mass and spin as an electron but opposite electrical charge (positive). It is the electron's antimatter counterpart. proper motion The apparent motion of a star across the sky (not including a star's parallax), arising from the star's velocity through space with respect to the Sun. proton A particle with a positive charge found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nuclei of each chemical element hold a characteristic number of protons, which is known as its atomic number. protoplanet A body formed by the gradual accumulation of planetesimals in a solar system's protoplanetary disk. protostar A mass of interstellar gas and dust in the process of collapsing to form a star. pulsar A rapidly rotating neutron star that generates regular pulses of light. Pulsars were discovered by observations at radio wavelengths but have since been observed in visible light, X-rays, and gamma rays. The pulses arise from light-emitting features that rotate in and out of our line of sight. pulsar wind nebula An extended cloud formed as the rapid outflow of charged particles (pulsar wind) generated by a neutron star expands into its surroundings, the most famous example being the Crab Nebula. Such nebulae have been detected across the electromagnetic spectrum (from radio waves of less than 100 MHz in frequency to extremely high-energy gamma rays (more than 100 TeV). Observations reveal the presence of jets and wind termination shocks, compact emission structures that change with time, shocked supernova ejecta, and newly formed dust. The detection of very high-energy gamma rays in these sources requires particles that have been accelerated to even higher energies, suggesting that pulsar wind nebulae are important sources of some of the highest-energy particles in the galaxy. Q quasar A class of active galactic nuclei, quasars are enormously bright objects in the distant universe that emit immense amounts of energy from a compact source — thought to be an accreting supermassive black hole — in the form of light ranging from radio waves to gamma rays. In visible light, quasars appear point-like, similar to stars. They typically emit thousands of times more light than a galaxy like our own. More than a million quasars have been cataloged, with the nearest ones several hundred million light-years away. Often abbreviated QSO, the name is a contraction of "quasi-stellar radio source." quantum mechanics The fundamental physical theory that describes the behavior of matter and light and whose unusual characteristics occur at atomic and smaller scales. It is a mathematical description of the motion and interaction of atoms and subatomic particles, incorporating concepts about the quantization of energy, quantum tunneling and entanglement, wave-particle duality, and the uncertainty principle. The predictions of quantum mechanics have been verified experimentally to high accuracy. R radial velocity The component in the velocity of an object's motion that is moving away or toward an observer. By observing Doppler shifts in spectral lines, astronomers can derive the radial velocity and determine how fast objects are moving away from or toward us. Measuring such shifts in the light of a star can reveal the presence of exoplanets and brown dwarfs orbiting them. radian (rad) A unit of angular measure, defined as the central angle of a circle whose subtended arc is equal to the radius of the circle. One radian is approximately 57.3°, and 2π radians equals 360°. radiation Energy moving through space in the form of electromagnetic waves (light) or as moving subatomic particles (such as electrons or protons). radiation belt A region surrounding a planet where charged particles accumulate under the influence of the planet's magnetic field, that is, a region in its magnetosphere. Around Earth, particles become trapped in two donut-sha[ed regions, known as the Van Allen Belts. The outer belt is made up of billions of high-energy particles that originate from the Sun, and the inner belt results from interactions of cosmic rays with Earth’s atmosphere. radiation pressure A minute pressure exerted on any surface by electromagnetic radiation. It is caused by the exchange of momentum between the surface and any photons absorbed, reflected, or emitted by it. radio Light with the lowest frequencies and longest wavelengths, produced by charged particles moving back and forth. Radio wavelengths range from 11.8 inches (30 centimeters) to larger than Earth. radio galaxy A type of active galaxy with giant regions of radio emission extending to millions of light-years, far beyond the galaxy's its visible structure. These structures are formed and powered by jets from a supermassive black hole in the galaxy's center. The sizes of these structures imply that the jets have been operating for tens to hundreds of millions of years. Cygnus A was the first radio galaxy identified (1951) and is one of the strongest radio sources in the sky. Rayleigh scattering The scattering of light by particles that are small compared to its wavelength, with the amount of scattering dependent on the color of the light. Air molecules, for example, are 1,000 times smaller than visible light wavelengths and scatter blue light about four times more strongly than red light, which is why a clear sky looks blue. Named for British physicist John William Strutt (1842–1919), also known as Lord Rayleigh. red dwarf (M dwarf) A small, low-mass, dim, and cool star. Many have big flares and mass ejections on their surfaces. The habitable zone of red dwarf stars is closer to the star than stars like our Sun, making it easier to observe potentially habitable planets. red giant star A low- or intermediate-mass star (born with a mass between about 0.5 and 5 Suns) in an advanced phase of stellar evolution. Due to internal changes related to the depletion of hydrogen fuel in their cores, the outer envelopes of such stars expand greatly, making them hundreds of times larger than the Sun. This causes their surfaces to cool and redden and increases their luminosity. redshift (z) The apparent shift toward longer wavelengths of light or spectral lines emitted by an object. In astronomy, there are three forms: Doppler redshift, due to the motion of sources away from us at the instant the light is emitted; gravitational redshift, seen as light escapes massive objects, such as the Sun or a white dwarf; and cosmological redshift (often symbolized as z) caused when the wavelength of the emitted light is lengthened during its travels by the stretching of space in the expanding universe. reflected light Light that has bounced off an object or material. The Moon is visible in the night sky because it reflects sunlight. Most objects and materials on Earth are visible because they reflect light from the Sun or from artificial lights. reflection law For a wavefront intersecting a reflecting surface, the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection, in the same plane defined by the ray of incidence and the normal. reflection nebula (plural: nebulae) A dusty cloud that glows by reflecting starlight. Because the dust grains have sizes similar to the wavelengths of blue light, this color is scattered most efficiently, which is why reflection nebulae frequently appear blue. refracted light Light that bends, or changes direction, as a result of passing from one material into another. For example, light refracts when it moves between air and water. Refraction causes optical effects such as the apparent bending of objects placed in water, and the formation of rainbows. Eyeglasses and telescope lenses work by refracting light. reionization This is the process where the neutral hydrogen that filled the universe was converted to ionized hydrogen by the first stars, galaxies, and black holes. As these objects formed and radiated energy, the universe reverted from being neutral to once again being an ionized plasma. This occurred between 150 million and 1 billion years after the big bang, and is formally known as the Era of Reionization. relativity Theories developed by German-born physicist Albert Einstein (1879-1955) that are central to modern science. The special theory of relativity (1905) is based on the principles that all constant, straight-line motion is relative, that light has the same speed in a vacuum for all observers, and that space-time is a four-dimensional continuum. From it emerged the equivalence of matter (m) and energy (E) as described by the famous equation E=mc 2 , where c is the speed of light. The general theory of relativity (1916) extends the special theory to systems that are accelerating with respect to one another, covering gravitation and the curvature of space-time. It predicted the existence of black holes, gravitational waves, and gravitational lensing. resolution (spatial) The ability of a telescope to differentiate between two objects in the sky that are separated by a small angular distance. The closer two objects can be while still allowing the telescope to see them as two distinct objects, the higher the resolution of the telescope. resolution (spectral) The ability of a telescope to differentiate two light signals which differ in frequency by a small amount. The closer the two signals are in frequency while still allowing the telescope to separate them as two distinct components, the higher the spectral resolution of the telescope. resonance A relationship in which the orbital period of one body is related to that of another by a whole-number fraction, such as 1/2, 2/3, or 3/5. The dwarf planet Pluto has a 2:3 mean motion resonance with Neptune such that for every two orbits of Pluto, Neptune orbits three times. Jupiter's moons Io, Europa, and Ganymede share a triple resonance of 4:2:1, meaning that Io orbits four times for every two orbits of Europa and each orbit of Ganymede. retrograde The actual or apparent motion of a body in a direction opposite to that of the (direct) motions of most members of the solar system or of other astronomical systems with a preferred direction of motion. Retrograde motion in the solar system is clockwise when viewed from the north pole of the ecliptic. revolution The movement of an object in a circular or elliptical course around another or about an axis or center, or a single orbit of one object around another or about an axis or center. right ascension A coordinate which, along with declination, may be used to locate any position in the sky. Right ascension is analogous to longitude for locating positions on Earth. Roche limit The closest distance from the center of a planet that a satellite can approach without being pulled apart by the planet's gravitational field, named for French mathematician Édouard Albert Roche (1820-1883). Roche lobe A region around a star in a binary system within which orbiting material is gravitationally bound to that star, the apex of the teardrop (which is the L1 Lagrangian point of the system) pointing towards the other star. Named for French mathematician Édouard Albert Roche (1820-1883). rotation The action of rotating around an axis or center, the spin n of a celestial body on its own axis. S satellite A body, either natural or artificial, that revolves around a larger body. The Moon is a natural satellite orbiting Earth, while the International Space Station is an artificial one. Schwarzschild black hole A black hole resulting from the complete gravitational collapse of an electrically neutral and nonrotating body, having a physical singularity at the center to which infalling matter inevitably proceeds and at which the curvature of space-time is infinite. The Schwarzschild radius — the radius of such a black hole's boundary or event horizon — is determined solely by the object's mass. First published in 1916 by German physicist Karl Schwarzschild (1873-1916) and derived from Einstein's equations of general relativity. Schwarzschild radius The radius of the event horizon for a Schwarzschild black hole. scientific notation A compact format for writing very large or very small numbers, most often used in scientific fields. The notation separates a number into two parts: a decimal fraction, usually between 1 and 10, and a power of ten. So 1.23 x 10 4 means 1.23 times 10 to the fourth power, or 12,300, and 5.67 × 10 –8 means 5.67 divided by 10 to the eighth power, or 0.0000000567. scintillation In astronomy, the twinkling of stars, caused by the passing of light through small-scale fluctuations in air density of Earth's turbulent atmosphere. Scintillation is always more pronounced near the horizon than near the zenith because incoming light rays near the horizon pass through a more of the atmosphere before reaching the observer. season A periodic change in weather conditions on a planet caused by the tilt of its rotational axis and its orbit around the Sun. Earth has four seasons in one year. Mars has similar seasons, but they last about seven months since its year is approximately two Earth years. Jupiter's seasons last three Earth years and Saturn's last about seven Earth years. second (s) The fundamental SI unit of time, defined as the period of time equal to the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the cesium-133 atom. A nanosecond is equal to one-billionth (10 –9 ) of a second, the time it takes light to travel 29.98 cm (11.8 inches). secondary eclipse The portion of a planet's orbit where it passes behind its star as viewed from an observer; a type of occultation. During a secondary eclipse, heat emitted from the planet does not contribute to the total light seen from the system. Light detected during the eclipse can be compared with the total light detected right before and after the eclipse to reveal contributions from the planet’s surface and atmosphere. semimajor axis One half of the longer (major) axis of an ellipse, a line from one side of the ellipse to the other passing through both foci. The semimajor axis of a planetary orbit is also the average distance from the planet to its star. The minimum (periapsis) and maximum (apoapsis) distances of the orbit can be calculated from the semimajor axis and its eccentricity (e): Min. = a × (1 – e) Max. = a × (1 + e) sensitivity A measure of how bright objects need to be in order for a telescope to detect them. A highly sensitive telescope can detect dim objects, while a telescope with low sensitivity can detect only bright ones. Seyfert galaxy The most commonly observed type of active galaxy, with about 1% of spiral galaxies classified as Seyferts. They have exceptionally bright, star-like central regions and spectra dominated by strong emission lines from highly ionized gases. They were first described in 1943 by the American astronomer Carl K. Seyfert (1911-1960). Type 1 Seyfert galaxies are strong ultraviolet and X-ray emitters and display two sets of emission lines. Narrow lines come from low-density gas moving at a few hundred thousand mph (a million kph), while broad lines arise from higher-density gas moving at up to 22 million mph (36 million kph). Type 2 Seyfert galaxies show only narrow spectral lines, and while weak in ultraviolet and X-rays, they are very bright in the infrared. Astronomers think both types have similar structures but appear different due to the way we view their central "engine," an accreting supermassive black hole. A galaxy is a Seyfert 1 if we see clearly into the back hole; it's a Seyfert 2 if we view it from the side, where thick dust obscures some features. Astronomers also recognize additional subclasses between the two main types. shock wave A propagating disturbance, characterized by an abrupt change in pressure, temperature, and density, that moves faster than the medium's speed of sound. Shock waves, often shortened to shocks, are common in astrophysics. Solar flares result in interplanetary shocks that traverse the solar system, rapidly moving planets and stars form bow shocks as they move through gaseous environments, and supernova remnants form shocks as they expand into the interstellar medium. singularity The point where matter is crushed to infinite density at the center of a black hole. This may be either a physical structure or a purely mathematical one, but right now astronomers don't know. The prediction of a singularity may signal the limits of relativity, where quantum effects not included in the theory become important in a more complete description of gravity. For rotating black holes, scientists believe the singularity takes the shape of a ring around the center of the black hole. solar eclipse When the Earth's moon is precisely between the Earth and the Sun, blocking the light of the Sun. During a total solar eclipse, the Sun is only completely blocked by the Moon for seven and a half minutes. solar flare A sudden, intense increase in electromagnetic radiation from the atmosphere of our Sun. Solar flares are typically associated with sunspots. Flares develop in seconds to minutes and may last up to several hours. High-energy particles, X-rays, and radio bursts are typically emitted. Flares are often accompanied by coronal mass ejections, which may propel a large quantity of particles into the solar wind and into interplanetary space. Particle fluxes can arrive at Earth minutes, hours, or days after the flare and can disturb radio communications and power line transmissions. X-ray outbursts similar to but far more powerful than those seen from the Sun, called stellar flares, have been observed from young stars. solar luminosity (L ⊙ or L Sun ) The total power output of the Sun radiated to space, equal to 3.85 × 10 26 watts or 3.85 × 10 33 ergs/sec. It is a convenient unit for describing the luminosities of other stars, star clusters, galaxies, and other objects. For example, the star Sirius shines with 25.4 L ⊙ , or 25.4 times the Sun's energy output. solar mass (M ⊙ or M Sun ) The mass of our Sun, a convenient unit for describing the masses of other stars, star clusters, galaxies, and other objects. One solar mass equals 1.988 x 10 30 kg, or about 333,000 Earth masses, and the unit name is often shortened to Suns. solar radius (R ⊙ or R Sun ) The radius of the Sun, equal to 695,700 km (432,300 miles). It is a convenient unit for describing the sizes of stars. The star Sirius is 1.71 R ⊙ , or 1.71 times larger than the Sun. solar system The Sun and its surrounding matter, including asteroids, comets, planets, and moons, held together by the Sun's gravitational influence. Other stars that are known to have planets orbiting them are referred to as other solar systems or planetary systems. solar wind, stellar wind The solar wind is a constant outflow of charged particles, especially protons and electrons, and embedded magnetic fields streaming off of the Sun at high velocities in all directions. The solar wind's composition, density, and speed vary with solar activity. It typically moves at about 895,000 mph (1.4 million km/h) in Earth's vicinity, but structures called coronal holes can generate streams traveling twice as fast. These streams interact with Earth's magnetosphere and play a role in space weather. Other types of stars, such as hot, luminous O- and B-type stars like Eta Carinae, can produce far denser and faster stellar winds than the Sun. snow line (ice line, frost line) The distance from a star where is it cold enough for volatile compounds such as water, carbon dioxide, or methane to form solid ice grains. The snow line will be different for each compound. For example, the water-ice snow line will be closer to a star than the methane snow line. space-time A mathematical model, originally described in 1908 by Hermann Minkowski (1864–1909) to better explain Einstein's special theory of relativity, that combines time and the three dimensions of space into a single four-dimensional continuum. It is often popularly described as the "fabric of the universe." space weather Variable conditions on the Sun, in the solar wind, and near Earth (within its upper atmosphere and magnetosphere) that can degrade the performance and reliability of technology and can endanger human health. Strong events are sometimes called solar storms. Solar activity is the main source of space weather. These include coronal mass ejections — immense fast-moving clouds of plasma launched into space — and brief, sudden eruptions of X-rays from solar flares. Severe space weather events pose a risk to astronauts and can damage satellites, disrupt communications, and, by inducing additional currents in electrical transmission wires, disrupt power systems on the ground. spectral line In a spectrum, light emitted or absorbed at a specific frequency by an atom or molecule. Each ion, atom, and molecule emits and absorbs light at specific wavelengths, making it possible to identify the makeup of a star or other celestial body. Emission lines produce bright features, absorption lines dark features, and each line represents light given off or absorbed by one or more substances. spectrometer The instrument connected to a telescope that separates the light signals into different frequencies, producing a spectrum. A dispersive spectrometer is like a prism, scattering light of different energies to different places. Astronomers measure the energy by noting where the X-rays go. A non-dispersive spectrometer measures the energy directly. spectroscopic observations Observations made using a spectrograph. spectroscopy The study of spectral lines from different atoms and molecules and the interpretation of suck lines observed in the spectrum of a celestial object. Spectroscopy is an important part of studying the makeup of astronomical sources. spectrum (plural: spectra) In astronomy, this term can refer to: An image or plot showing the distribution of components of light according to wavelength, as captured an instrument called a spectrometer or spectrograph. The entire range of wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation in all forms, from radio to gamma rays. speed of light The speed at which light in all its forms moves through a vacuum, defined as 299,792,458 meters per second (186,282 miles per second). Put another way, light takes a nanosecond to travel 11.8 inches (29.98 centimeters). Light travels at slightly slower speeds when it moves through materials like glass or air. spiral galaxy A spiral-shaped system of stars, dust, and gas clouds. A typical spiral galaxy has a spherical central bulge of older stars surrounded by a flattened galactic disk that contains a spiral pattern of young, hot stars, as well as interstellar matter. star A huge, incandescent ball of gas held together by gravity — like our Sun — that shines because of energy produced in its core by nuclear fusion. Despite their names, neutron stars and white dwarfs are stellar remnants rather than true stars because they no longer generate energy in their centers. star cluster A collection of stars, ranging in number from dozens to millions, that formed at roughly the same time and place. Open star clusters contain up to a few thousand stars, and because they are loosely bound together by their mutual gravity, typically disperse over hundreds of millions of years. Globular clusters contain tens of thousands to millions of tightly packed stars, including some of the oldest known, and remain intact for billions of years. star formation Star formation is the process by which dense regions within molecular clouds in interstellar space, sometimes referred to as "stellar nurseries" or "star-forming regions", collapse and form stars. starburst galaxy A galaxy undergoing an exceptionally high rate of star formation relative to that seen in most others. The Milky Way galaxy forms stars at a rate of about three Sun-like stars per year, while starburst galaxies can form 100 or more Sun-like stars a year. Starbursts episodes may be triggered by a close encounter or merger with another galaxy. Stefan-Boltzmann constant (σ) The total radiation emitted by a blackbody is proportional to the radiating surface area and the fourth power of its absolute temperature. The proportionality constant, σ, equals 5.670374419 x 10-8 watts per square meter x K-4. Named for physicists Josef Stefan (1835-1893) and Ludwig Boltzmann (1844-1906). Stefan-Boltzmann law The total radiation emitted by a blackbody is proportional to the radiating surface area and the fourth power of its absolute temperature. The proportionality constant, σ, equals 5.670374419 x 10-8 watts per square meter x K-4. Named for physicists Josef Stefan (1835-1893) and Ludwig Boltzmann (1844-1906). stellar classification A designation consisting of a letter and a number according to the nature of a star's spectral lines, which correspond roughly to surface temperature. The classes are: O, B, A, F, G, K, and M. O stars are the hottest; M the coolest, with the letters L, T, and Y later added to extend the scheme to even cooler substellar objects called brown dwarfs. The numbers are simply subdivisions of the major classes. The classes are oddly sequenced because they were assigned long before astronomers understood their relationship to temperature. O and B stars are rare but very bright; M stars are numerous but dim. The Sun is designated G2. stellar evolution (stellar life cycle) The process of change that occurs during a star's lifetime from its birth to its death. stellar-mass black hole This black hole forms when a massive star explodes and leaves behind a small, heavy core. If this core is massive enough, it will collapse on itself and form a black hole. Stellar-mass black holes are typically between 3 and 10 solar masses. steradian (sr) The supplementary SI unit of solid angle, defined as the solid central angle (circular cone) of a sphere that encloses a surface on the sphere equal to the square of the sphere's radius. submillimeter Light in the transition region between the microwave and far-infrared parts of the spectrum that can be regarded as either, with wavelengths between 1 and 0.1 millimeter. sunspots Cooler (and thus darker) regions on the Sun where the magnetic field loops up out of the solar surface. super-Earth An exoplanet with a mass higher than Earth's, but substantially below the masses of the solar system's ice giants, Uranus and Neptune, which have masses of 15 and 17 times Earth's, respectively. supermassive black hole (SMBH, SBH) A black hole possessing as much mass as a million or a billion stars. Supermassive black holes reside in the centers of galaxies and are the engines that power active galactic nuclei and quasars. Sagittarius A* (pronounced Sagittarius A-star) is the supermassive black hole at the center of our Milky Way galaxy. supernova (plural: supernovae) The explosion death of a massive star, resulting in a sharp increase in its brightness followed by gradual fading over weeks or months. At peak light output, supernovae can outshine a galaxy. The star's outer layers blast outward in a radioactive cloud. Visible long after the initial explosion fades from view, this cloud forms a supernova remnant. In type II, Ib, and Ic supernovae, the explosion is triggered when the star's core ran out of fuel and collapsed. Such stars may leave behind neutron stars or black holes. In type Ia supernovae, an Earth-sized remnant called a white dwarf explodes, trigger either by merging with a binary companion or by accumulating enough gas from a companion star to exceed its stability limit. Type 1a supernovae exhibit roughly the same intrinsic brightness and play an important role in determining cosmic distances. supernova remnant (SNR) The glowing, expanding, gaseous remains of a supernova explosion. synchronous rotation Said of a satellite if the period of its rotation about its axis is the same as the period of its orbit around its primary. This implies that the satellite always keeps the same hemisphere facing its primary (like the Moon). It also implies that one hemisphere (the leading hemisphere) always faces in the direction of the satellite's motion while the other (trailing) one always faces backward. synchrotron radiation Light, characteristically highly polarized, emitted by charged particles moving at speeds close to that of light when their paths are altered, as by gyrating in a magnetic field. The stronger the magnetic field and the higher the energy of the particles, the greater the intensity and frequency of the emitted radiation. High-energy electrons spiraling in Jupiter's magnetic field emit radio waves through this process, and the Crab Nebula emits radio, visible, and ultraviolet light. Active galaxies, kilonovae, and other jet-producing cosmic objects also emit this radiation. Systéme Internationale d'Unités (SI) - International System of Units The international decimal system of weights and measures in common use in today, derived from and extending the metric system. The fundamental SI units of length, time, and mass are, respectively, the meter, the second, and the kilogram. T telescope An instrument for making distant objects appear nearer and larger, often containing an arrangement of lenses, or of curved mirrors and lenses, by which rays of light are collected and focused and the resulting image magnified. Astronomical telescopes collect light emitted by celestial objects across the electromagnetic spectrum. At energies lower than and beyond those of visible light, telescopes may take the form of a large dish (radio) or a particle detector (gamma rays). temperature A measure of the heat of an object and the average kinetic energy of the randomly moving particles within it. Astronomers use the Kelvin scale in their research. Also see Absolute Zero. terminator The boundary between the day and night sides of a planet, moon, or other planetary object; also called the "twilight zone." On an object with no atmosphere, the terminator appears as a sharp line between light and dark. On an object with atmosphere, which scatters light, the terminator can appear broader and less distinct, grading from light to dark. On planets that rotate relative to their star, the terminator moves over the course of the day. But on a planet that is tidally locked, the terminator remains stationary. terrestrial gamma-ray flash (TGF) Millisecond pulses of gamma rays associated with lightning and produced by electrons accelerated to high energy within thunderstorms. Terrestrial gamma-ray flashes were discovered in 1994 by an experiment aboard NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. terrestrial planets These rocky planets are between half of Earth's size to twice its radius. Exoplanets with a mass higher than Earth's may be rocky as well, but those are considered super-Earths. In our solar system, Earth, Mars, Mercury, and Venus are terrestrial planets. thermal emission Heat energy given off by an object in the form of electromagnetic radiation (light). Thermal emission is directly related to an object's temperature. thermal emission spectrum The pattern of light (the brightness of different wavelengths) that is given off by an object, material, surface, or region of space as a result of its temperature. The thermal emission spectrum is used to determine temperature, which can be combined with other information to infer composition and other properties. A blackbody spectrum is a type of thermal emission spectrum. tidal heating A phenomenon in which a planet or moon experiences internal heating as a result of being physically distorted (e.g., stretched, compressed, or flexed) by a continuous change in gravitational pull. The heating is a result of internal friction that occurs as the object changes shape. An object in an eccentric (non-circular) orbit will experience tidal heating as the changing distance between it and its parent body (the star or planet it is orbiting) causes a change in the gravitational pull between the two objects. tidally locked (or tidal locking) An effect caused by the gravitational interactions between an orbiting celestial object and the object it orbits, causing the same side of the orbiting object (usually an exoplanet) to face the host star. The gravitational interactions slow the objects' rotations (or spins) over many millions of years. time dilation The slowing down of the passage of time as measured between a clock in a frame of reference that is moving relative to the observer's (special relativity) and/or at a different height in a gravitational field than the observer's (general relativity). Both effects must be included for satellite navigation systems like GPS to work. time-series observation A set of measurements taken over a period of time, typically at regular intervals (cadence) of seconds, minutes, or hours. Time-series observations are used to detect and record changes in an object's position, brightness, and other properties over time. Common examples of time-series observations include those of variable stars, eclipsing binary stars, variable brown dwarfs, and exoplanet transits. tracker The part of a high-energy gamma-ray detector that is used to determine the arrival direction of the incoming gamma ray. When a high-energy gamma ray passes through a target material, it can convert into an electron and a positron, whose paths through the tracker can be detected. Backtracking along this trajectory allows the direction of the original gamma ray to be determined. transient A source that appears and then quickly disappears, such as a gamma-ray burst. transit The passage of a celestial body or satellite across the face of a relatively larger body, such as a planet crossing the face of its host star. Thousands of exoplanets have been discovered through transits because the events measurably and regularly dim the star's light. Transit photometry is the measure of the light changes caused by transit events. transit technique/transit method A technique for detecting and studying exoplanets. When a planet passes directly between a star and its observer, it dims the star's light by a measurable amount. Transits can help determine a variety of exoplanet characteristics, including its orbit or period, the size of the planet, and details about its atmosphere. transiting planet A planet that transits its star, or appears to cross the face of the star as it orbits. Whether or not a planet is "transiting" depends on the orientation of the planet's orbit with respect to the viewer. For example, we can observe a transit when the planet passes between its star and the telescope. transmission spectroscopy When light (also known as radiation) passes through a material such as a planet's atmosphere, some of the light is absorbed by the material and some is passed through or is transmitted. The resulting spectrum shows both the molecular absorption and transmission of the material. transmitted light Light that has passed through a material. Transparent and translucent materials like water, glass, and air transmit visible light. Most materials transmit some forms of light and block (absorb or reflect) others. trojan asteroid These asteroids orbit at the same distance from the Sun as Jupiter, both leading and following Jupiter's orbit. They are airless rocks that failed to adhere to one another to become larger bodies as the solar system was forming 4.6 billion years ago. These are not part of the main asteroid belt, which orbits the Sun between Mars and Jupiter. T Tauri star A star that is in the process of evolving onto its mature phase, known as the main sequence on the Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram. Many T Tauri stars have a circumstellar or protoplanetary disk. two-dimensional spectrum Data about an object spread out by wavelength (color) by a spectrograph. For a point source, like a star, this creates a rainbow-like image of the brightness of the object at different wavelengths. For an extended object like a galaxy, this creates an image of the brightness of the object at different points along one axis and wavelength on the other axis. Explore this in a visual example. U ultramafic An igneous rock made of silicate minerals that have more iron and magnesium, and less silica, than basalt. Earth's mantle (the layer beneath the crust) is ultramafic. ultraviolet (UV) Light at wavelengths shorter than violet visible light, ranging from 100 to 400 nanometers. Earth's atmosphere blocks out most ultraviolet light from astronomical sources, so studying them requires telescopes in the upper atmosphere or in space. An exception is the Sun, whose ultraviolet light can quickly damage unprotected skin (sunburn). universal constant of gravitation (G) The constant of proportionality in Isaac Newton's law of universal gravitation plays an analogous role in Albert Einstein's general relativity. It is equal to 6.6743×10 −11 meter 3 per kilogram per second 2 . universe Everything that exists, including the totality of time and space and all of the matter and energy in it; the entire cosmos. V vacuum Ideally, a space in which all matter is absent, but in reality, no vacuum is perfectly free of matter. Even in the most remote part of the universe, there's roughly one atom or ion per cubic centimeter, plus other particles, such as neutrinos. And since normal matter only makes up about 5% of the total energy of the cosmos, dark matter and dark energy, which make up 27% and 68% respectively, must be present as well. variable star A star whose luminosity (brightness) changes with time. visible light Light at wavelengths the human eye can see, ranging from red (about 700 nanometers) to violet (400 nanometers). volcanism The release of molten material, known as magma, from the interior to the surface of a planet or a planet's moon or satellite. Magma cools to become lava. Volcanoes have been identified throughout the solar system, including Mars, Venus, and Jupiter's moon Io. W wave A vibration in some media that transfers energy from one place to another. Sound waves are vibrations passing in air. Light waves are vibrations in electromagnetic fields. wavelength The distance between two successive peaks or crests on a wave. Human eyes register wavelength differences in visible light as differences in color. wave-particle duality A concept in quantum mechanics that fundamental entities, like photons and electrons, exhibit either particle or wave properties according to the experimental circumstances. An example is the photoelectric effect, which can be explained only by light behaving as a particle. weight The force acting on an object due to gravity. Weight changes due to location. Also see Mass. white dwarf A hot, dense, compact remnant of a Sun-like star. Typically, a white dwarf packs a mass roughly equal to the Sun's into a ball just 1% the Sun's size, comparable to Earth's. Such stars no longer produce their own energy, having exhausted their core fuel supply, but are much hotter than Sun when they form and cool very slowly. Wien's displacement law The blackbody radiation curve for different temperatures will peak at different wavelengths that are inversely proportional to the temperature. As temperature rises, the peak of the radiant energy shifts toward shorter wavelengths (higher frequency and energy). The color of a star is determined by its temperature, with the hottest stars emitting more blue light and the coolest emitting more red light. weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP) Theoretical subatomic particles that do not respond to electromagnetism or interact through the strong nuclear force, but interact only through the weak nuclear force and gravity. Because of these properties, they are difficult to detect, and are therefore considered "dark" — hence, WIMPs are a possible form of dark matter. Wolf-Rayet star [wolf reye-ay] A class of very hot, intensely luminous stars whose spectra show prominent broad emission lines of ionized helium and highly ionized nitrogen or carbon, depletion of hydrogen, and strong stellar winds. A typical Wolf-Rayet star is several times the diameter of the Sun, 10 or more times its mass, and thousands to hundreds of thousands of times more luminous. Such stars may end their days as type Ib and type Ic supernovae. Only a few hundred are known in the Milky Way. Named after French astronomers Charles Wolf (1827-1918) and Georges Rayet (1839-1906). X X-rays Invisible light of short wavelength and high energy. X-rays have shorter wavelengths than ultraviolet light but longer wavelengths than gamma rays, spanning 0.01 to 10 nanometers. X-rays can pass through materials that visible light cannot. Soft X-rays are generally those with energies less than 10 keV (wavelengths longer than 0.12 nm), while hard X-rays have higher energies and shorter wavelengths. X-ray binary A binary system in which one member is a collapsed object such as a white dwarf, neutron star, or black hole. The separation between the stars is small enough so that matter flows from the normal star (the donor) to the collapsed star, producing X-rays in the process. In low-mass X-ray binaries, the compact object is either a neutron star or a black hole and is more massive than the donor. In high-mass systems, the donor has a mass of 10 or more Suns and is typically either a supergiant O/B star or a Be star, both of which produce strong stellar winds and experience high rates of mass loss. The compact object is typically a neutron star, which accretes directly from the stellar wind. Y year The length of time a planet takes to orbit its star or sun. Citations of this term are often compared to Earth's year or hours for easier comparison. For example, Mercury's year is 88 Earth days and Jupiter's year is 11.86 Earth years. yellow dwarf star (F star, G star) An intermediate mass star, like our sun. Yellow dwarfs lead quieter, longer lives over billions of years. Z z The ratio of the observed change in the wavelength of light emitted by a moving object to the rest wavelength of the emitted light. In general, with the velocity of the object (v), the speed of light (c), the rest wavelength (lambda), and delta-lambda for the observed change in the wavelength, z is given by z = (delta–lambda)/lambda = (sqrt(1+v/c) / sqrt(1–v/c)) – 1. If the velocity of the object is small compared to the speed of light, then z = (delta–lambda)/lambda = v/c The farthest observed gamma-ray burst with a redshift measurement is GRB 090423 (z = 8.2), which corresponds to the event occurring nearly 13.1 billion years ago. zodiacal light A faint, elongated, triangular glow seen extending from the horizon before sunrise or after sunset. It is caused by sunlight scattered off of dust particles in the inner solar system, most of which is thought to have been ejected by Jupiter-family comets. For both hemispheres, zodiacal light is best seen in evenings in the spring and in autumn before dawn.

Explore Webb 1 min read Lion Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s NIRCam (Near Infrared Camera) and MIRI (Mid Infrared Instrument) instruments recently imaged planetary nebula NGC 2392, which is nicknamed the Lion Nebula due to its distinct shape. This near- and mid-infrared composite image reveals the complex structure of the nebula, which has formed and continues to be sculpted by the remains of a dying star. The stellar core, also known as a white dwarf, is located at the center and looks like the button nose of the lion. The central dying star is so hot that its radiation is “cooking” everything from the inside and producing a bubble of ionized hydrogen gas as it does. The gas bubble, which is the lion’s “face,” features cavernous shells and rings with tendrils that are expanding and destroying dust upon encounter. However, not all dust is obliterated from the scene. The lion’s mane is the interior of a dust shell that is being illuminated by the central star’s core. Within the mane some compact clumps of dust (red and orange) have managed to survive so far and are protecting the material that lies behind them. Additional clumps of molecular hydrogen appear yellow. The Lion Nebula is a snapshot in time. It’s taken several thousand years for the gas and dust to be shaped in this way, and it continues to change as the star drives away the material. Astronomers estimate NGC 2392 will eventually disperse in about 10,000 years, which is a relatively short period in astronomical terms. About the Object R.A. Position R.A. Position Right ascension – analogous to longitude – is one component of an object's position. 07:29:10.76 Dec. Position Dec. Position Declination – analogous to latitude – is one component of an object's position. +20:54:42.49 Constellation Constellation One of 88 recognized regions of the celestial sphere in which the object appears. Gemini Distance Distance The physical distance from Earth to the astronomical object. Distances within our solar system are usually measured in Astronomical Units (AU). Distances between stars are usually measured in light-years. Interstellar distances can also be measured in parsecs. About 5,000 light-years away Dimensions Dimensions The physical size of the object or the apparent angle it subtends on the sky. This image is about 1.8 arcminutes across (2.6 light-years) About the Data Data Description Data Description Proposal: A description of the observations, their scientific justification, and the links to the data available in the science archive. Science Team: The astronomers who planned the observations and analyzed the data. "PI" refers to the Principal Investigator. This image was created with Webb data from proposal: 9548 (M. Garcia Marin). Instrument Instrument The science instrument used to produce the data. NIRCam, MIRI Exposure Dates Exposure Dates The date(s) that the telescope made its observations and the total exposure time. 19 Nov. 2025 Filters Filters The camera filters that were used in the science observations. F115W, F187N, F212N, F335M, F1000W Object Name Object Name A name or catalog number that astronomers use to identify an astronomical object. Lion Nebula, NGC 2392, Caldwell 39 Object Description Object Description The type of astronomical object. Planetary nebula Release Date August 10, 2026 Science Release Lion Nebula Roars to Life With NASA’s Webb Read the release Credit Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI; Image Processing: Alyssa Pagan (STScI) Downloads Full Res (For Print), 3505 × 3505 tif (35.16 MB) Full Res (For Display), 3505 × 3505 png (16.5 MB) 3505 × 3505 jpg (3.61 MB) 2000 × 2000 jpg (883.08 KB) Color Info Color Info A brief description of the methods used to convert telescope data into the color image being presented. These images were acquired by the NIRCam and MIRI instruments on the Webb Space Telescope. Several filters were used to sample varying wavelength ranges. The color results from assigning different hues (colors) to each monochromatic (grayscale) image associated with an individual filter. In this case, the assigned colors are: Blue: F115W, Cyan: F187N, Yellow: F212N, Orange: F335M, Red: F1000W Related Images & Videos Lion Nebula (MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s mid-infrared image of planetary nebula NGC 2392, nicknamed the Lion Nebula, highlights the varying dust structures. Some dust is being destroyed by the dying central star’s radiation, while some dust filaments manage to survive. Share Details Last Updated Sep 22, 2026 Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Laura Betz NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland laura.e.betz@nasa.gov Related Terms James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Planetary Nebulae Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Webb James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Science Overview Webb Observatory Webb Image Galleries

Explore Webb 1 min read Lion Nebula (MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope observed planetary nebula NGC 2392 with its MIRI (Mid Infrared Instrument) instrument, revealing the presence of dust and its varying structures within this tumultuous environment. Nicknamed the Lion Nebula due to its appearance, this collection of gas and dust is created and sculpted by the remains of a dying star, which is in the center and resembles the button nose of the lion. While some dust is being destroyed by the bubble of ionized gas that forms the lion’s face, most of the gas is being ejected and migrating away from the star due to its radiation. In this image, cyan highlights the lion’s mane, which is the interior of a dust shell that is being illuminated by the central star. Within the mane, toward its edges, are purple clumps that look like they have cometary tails. These fluffy structures are also dust, which have managed to survive so far and protect the structures behind them. About the Object R.A. Position R.A. Position Right ascension – analogous to longitude – is one component of an object's position. 07:29:10.76 Dec. Position Dec. Position Declination – analogous to latitude – is one component of an object's position. +20:54:42.49 Constellation Constellation One of 88 recognized regions of the celestial sphere in which the object appears. Gemini Distance Distance The physical distance from Earth to the astronomical object. Distances within our solar system are usually measured in Astronomical Units (AU). Distances between stars are usually measured in light-years. Interstellar distances can also be measured in parsecs. About 5,000 light-years away Dimensions Dimensions The physical size of the object or the apparent angle it subtends on the sky. This image is about 1.8 arcminutes across (2.6 light-years) About the Data Data Description Data Description Proposal: A description of the observations, their scientific justification, and the links to the data available in the science archive. Science Team: The astronomers who planned the observations and analyzed the data. "PI" refers to the Principal Investigator. This image was created with Webb data from proposal: 9548 (M. Garcia Marin). Instrument Instrument The science instrument used to produce the data. MIRI Exposure Dates Exposure Dates The date(s) that the telescope made its observations and the total exposure time. 19 Nov. 2025 Filters Filters The camera filters that were used in the science observations. F115W, F187N, F212N, F335M, F1000W Object Name Object Name A name or catalog number that astronomers use to identify an astronomical object. Lion Nebula, NGC 2392, Caldwell 39 Object Description Object Description The type of astronomical object. Planetary nebula Release Date August 10, 2026 Science Release Lion Nebula Roars to Life With NASA’s Webb Read the release Credit Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI; Image Processing: Alyssa Pagan (STScI) Downloads Full Res (For Print), 984 × 717 tif (2.03 MB) Full Res (For Display), 984 × 717 png (746.06 KB) 984 × 717 jpg (162.84 KB) Color Info Color Info A brief description of the methods used to convert telescope data into the color image being presented. These images were acquired by the MIRI instruments on the Webb Space Telescope. Several filters were used to sample wide wavelength ranges. The color results from assigning different hues (colors) to each monochromatic (grayscale) image associated with an individual filter. In this case, the assigned colors are: Blue: F770W, Green: F1000W, Red: F1500W Related Images & Videos Lion Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Image) NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope imaged the planetary nebula NGC 2392, the Lion Nebula, using the observatory’s NIRCam and MIRI instruments. The central star’s remains are responsible for the nebula’s structure, including a lion face-shaped bubble of ionized gas and dust “mane.” Share Details Last Updated Sep 22, 2026 Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Laura Betz NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland laura.e.betz@nasa.gov Related Terms James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Planetary Nebulae Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Webb James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Science Overview Webb Observatory Webb Image Galleries

Planetary Nebulae Filters Sort: Publish date Title Publish date Last modified date Relevance Order: Descending Ascending Descending Lion Nebula Roars to Life With NASA’s Webb 4 min read Observing across the starry “plains” of space, NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has taken new images of NGC 2392, nicknamed… Aug 10, 2026 Article Lion Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Image) 1 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope imaged the planetary nebula NGC 2392, the Lion Nebula, using the observatory’s NIRCam and MIRI… Aug 10, 2026 Image Lion Nebula (MIRI Image) 1 min read NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s mid-infrared image of planetary nebula NGC 2392, nicknamed the Lion Nebula, highlights the varying dust… Aug 10, 2026 Image Helix Nebula Mini Poster 1 min read Download and print a mini poster featuring an image of the Helix Nebula, captured in 2024 by NASA's James Webb… Jul 8, 2026 Image Telescopes Team Up for New View of Cat’s Eye Nebula 1 min read This March 3, 2026, image combines views from ESA’s (European Space Agency) Euclid and NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope to feature… Mar 11, 2026 Image Article Two Observatories, One Cosmic Eye: Hubble and Euclid View Cat’s Eye Nebula 3 min read This new NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope image features one of the most visually intricate remnants of a dying star: the Cat’s Eye… Mar 3, 2026 Article NASA’s Webb Examines Cranium Nebula 3 min read Two heads are better than one in the latest images from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope, which reveal new detail… Feb 25, 2026 Article Exposed Cranium Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Images) 1 min read The differences in what Webb’s infrared instruments reveal and conceal within the PMR 1 “Exposed Cranium” nebula is apparent in… Feb 25, 2026 Image Exposed Cranium Nebula (NIRCam and MIRI Compass Image) 1 min read These images of the “Exposed Cranium” nebula PMR 1, captured by the James Webb Space Telescope’s NIRCam (Near-Infrared Camera) and… Feb 25, 2026 Image News & Articles See All News Article 4 Min Read Lion Nebula Roars to Life With NASA’s Webb Article 3 Min Read Two Observatories, One Cosmic Eye: Hubble and Euclid View Cat’s Eye Nebula Article 3 Min Read NASA’s Webb Examines Cranium Nebula Article 4 Min Read NASA’s Hubble Captures Light Show Around Rapidly Dying Star Multimedia Go To Galleries Go To Galleries Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA ELISA MABL AVATAR-Org1 MVP-Plant-02 Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere

Roman The Roman Observatory The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will help us solve some of the most profound mysteries in astrophysics, such as how the universe has evolved, its ultimate fate, and whether we are alone. To make Roman’s sensitive measurements possible, the telescope will observe from a vantage point about 930,000 miles (1.5 million km) away from Earth in the direction opposite the Sun. At this special place in space, called the second Sun-Earth Lagrange point, or L2, gravitational forces balance to keep objects in steady orbits with very little assistance. Roman’s barrel-like shape will help block out unwanted light from the Sun, Earth, and Moon, and the spacecraft’s distant location will help keep the instruments cool. The thermal stability of an observatory at L2 will provide a ten-fold improvement beyond Hubble in much of the data Roman will gather. The amount of detail these observations will reveal is directly related to the size of the telescope’s mirror, since a larger surface gathers more light. Roman’s primary mirror is 7.9 feet (2.4 meters) across. While it’s the same size as the Hubble Space Telescope’s main mirror, it is less than one-fourth the weight. Roman’s mirror weighs only 410 pounds (186 kilograms) thanks to major improvements in technology. The primary mirror, in concert with other optics, will send light to Roman’s two science instruments: the Wide Field Instrument and Coronagraph. Instruments Wide Field Instrument Coronagraph Wide Field Instrument The Wide Field Instrument is a 300-megapixel infrared camera that will allow scientists to look very far back in time. Seeing the universe in its early stages will help unravel how it has expanded throughout its history, which will hint at how it may continue to evolve. Read More Roman Space Telescope's Wide Field Instrument Coronagraph The coronagraph demonstrates technology that eliminates the glare of nearby stars and allows astronomers to directly image planets in orbit around them. It will be far more powerful than any other coronagraph ever flown, seeing planets that are almost a billion times fainter than their host star. Read More Roman Space Telescope's Coronagraph Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope Illustrations 25 Images Go To Gallery Go To Gallery Click and drag to rotate Downloads gltf-binary File (3D Model) 28.28 MB To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video This animation shows key systems assembling to form NASA's Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. It starts with the spacecraft bus and then adds the instrument carrier. Then the Coronagraph Instrument joins, followed by the mirror assembly and the Wide Field Instrument, completing the main half of the observatory. The outer portion, which contains the outer barrel assembly, solar array Sun shield, and deployable aperture cover, slides over the exposed mirror to complete the full observatory. This animation includes a version with a transparent alpha channel. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Conceptual Image Lab Roman interactive Explore the Roman Observatory Systems Take a tour around the telescope with this Interactive Diagram. Explore Roman Featured Story Building Roman Technicians have completed the construction of NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. The Roman observatory is slated to launch on… Read the Story Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Exoplanets Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Galaxies

Roman Roman Science Explore the following topics of the science surveys and programs that the Roman Space Telescope will explore. Dark Energy The Roman Space Telescope measurements will help illuminate the dark energy puzzle. With a better understanding of dark energy, we will have a better sense of the past and future evolution of the universe. Read More Exoplanets Completing a census of Exoplanets to help answer new questions about the potential for life in the universe. This census makes use of a technique that can find exoplanets down to a mass only a few times that of the Moon. Read More Dark Matter Almost completely undetectable matter whose existence is implied to explain an excess of gravity measured in galaxies and galaxy clusters. Read More Near Infrared A vast astrophysics treasure trove allowing the exploration of everything from nearby stars to distant galaxies. Read More Baryon Acoustic Oscillations Roman will detect vestiges of sound waves, called baryon acoustic oscillations (BAOs), that once rippled through the primordial cosmic sea. Read More Type Ia Supernovae Roman will see thousands of exploding stars called supernovae across vast stretches of time and space. Read More Weak Lensing Roman will study how the universe’s web of matter has evolved by measuring how gravity subtly bends the path of light across vast distances. Read More General Observer Program The Roman Space Telescope will offer a General Observer program that supports community-based observing programs. Read More Observation Surveys To fulfill the mission’s top-level science objectives, Roman will conduct three core community surveys. Read More FOR SCIENCE COMMUNITY Roman Scientist Resources The following material is intended specifically for the Roman Science Community. Learn More NASA/Jolearra Tshiteya

Roman 2 Min Read Roman Commissioning Beauty pass of Roman, coming around from behind with high-gain antenna rotating. Credits: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Conceptual Image Lab Contents Where is Roman? Deployments Roman's Orbit Explore the Roman Systems 3D View Where is Roman? Roman is making its three-month journey from Earth to Sun-Earth Lagrange Point 2, or L2. Along the way, Roman is undergoing a process called commissioning, where systems are turned on, adjusted, calibrated, and prepared for science operations. Commissioning is the time for scientists and engineers to make sure that Roman is performing as expected. The schedule is subject to change as the team assesses and adjusts as needed. Visit the Roman Blog Deployments An hour and 23 minutes after launch, Roman began to emerge from the tight configuration that allowed it to fit in the rocket fairing. The solar panels and sunshade deployed, shading the rest of the observatory and providing power to the systems. Within the upcoming days, the antenna will swing out and the visor-like deployable aperture cover will move into place to permanently reveal and shade the primary mirror. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Roman's Orbit This visualization shows the stable, halo orbit that Roman will have around L2. At this location, the gravity of the Sun and Earth, together with an object’s motion around the Sun, let it stay lined up with Earth as they orbit, allowing Roman to have a relatively steady orbit without using much fuel. This location also offers exceptionally stable optical performance and a constant, unobstructed view of a wide swath of the sky; Earth won’t block much of Roman’s view since it will be so distant. And at L2, heat from Earth, the Sun, and the Moon have less effect on infrared telescopes, which “see” heat. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Explore the Roman Systems Learn more about the systems that are getting turned on, tested and calibrated. Unable to render the provided source 3D View Click and drag to rotate Downloads gltf-binary File (3D Model) 28.28 MB Unable to render the provided source Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Missions Humans in Space Climate Change Solar System

Roman Nancy Grace Roman Telescope Stories Help Refine Data from Space Telescopes with Artifact InSPECtor 3 min read How do scientists studying space with data from a telescope hundreds of thousands of miles away know that what they are seeing is real? A new NASA project, Artifact InSPECtor, invites you to find out – and by doing so,… Article Roman Commissioning 2 min read Where is Roman? Roman is making its three-month journey from Earth to Sun-Earth Lagrange Point 2, or L2. Along the way, Roman is undergoing a process called commissioning, where systems are turned on, adjusted, calibrated, and prepared for science operations.… Article 9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 1 min read NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is set to launch at 7:26 a.m. EDT on Sunday, Aug. 30. While you wait to watch the launch, brush up on some key facts about this wide-view mission. To learn more about the… Article NASA’s Roman Telescope Will Spot Distant Black Holes That Shred Stars 6 min read Lee esta nota de prensa en español aquí. How do black holes at the center of galaxies form and grow over time? To answer this question, scientists need to detect and study supermassive black holes at great distances, which existed much… Article Euclid View of Milky Way Heart Previews Core Survey by NASA’s Roman 6 min read A new look at the heart of our Milky Way galaxy by Euclid, an ESA (European Space Agency) mission with NASA contributions, overlaps with a region scientists will observe with NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, launching later this summer.… Article Experience the Launch of NASA’s Roman Space Telescope 8 min read Are you ready for a new view of the universe? The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will reveal distant worlds, dark energy, and the structure of the cosmos, and we want you to be a part of it! Digital creators… Article NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Primary Mirror Gets Last Look 4 min read Engineers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, have completed their final inspection of a key element for the agency’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope: the primary mirror. This 7.9-foot (2.4-meter) mirror will collect and focus light from… Article NASA’s Roman Mission Preps to Unveil New Populations of Faraway Worlds 6 min read NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is poised to make a major advance in the hunt for worlds outside our solar system, known as exoplanets. Scientists expect the mission to reveal around 100,000 worlds — a staggering leap compared to… Article Hubble Survey Sets Up Roman’s Future Look Near Milky Way’s Center 7 min read The Milky Way’s galactic bulge, the bulbous region that surrounds the galactic center, contains a dense collection of stars, planets, and other free-floating objects. This region has been studied for decades with numerous ground-based and space-based telescopes, including NASA’s Hubble… Article NASA’s Roman Poised to Transform Hunt for Elusive Neutron Stars 5 min read Lee esta nota de prensa en español aquí. Astronomers have long known that neutron stars, the crushed cores left behind after massive stars explode, should be scattered throughout the Milky Way galaxy. However, most of them are effectively invisible. A… Article

Explore Hubble 5 min read NASA’s Hubble, Webb Find Far-out Solar System Objects ‘Remember’ Past NASA Hubble Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center NASA Webb Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center Sep 08, 2026 Article This artist’s concept depicts a Trans-Neptunian Object, a small, faint, icy body orbiting the Sun beyond the orbit of Neptune. These objects are so small that even with NASA’s Hubble and Webb space telescopes, they appear only as tiny points of light. Artwork: NASA, ESA, Leah Hustak (STScI) For the first time, scientists used the joint power of NASA’s Hubble and James Webb Space Telescopes to study some of the most far-flung bodies in our solar system, Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs). Some of these are the smallest and faintest ever directly seen. The researchers unexpectedly found fewer small TNOs than they expected, and that the colors of these bodies followed the same relationships as their larger family members. These objects are typically small, faint, icy bodies orbiting the Sun beyond the orbit of Neptune . Most are more than 100 million times dimmer than objects visible to the unaided eye. In two complementary papers published Tuesday in The Astronomical Journal, teams analyzed the color, composition, and size distribution of 27 newly discovered tiny, dim TNOs. This class of small bodies offers the best view into an early stage of planet-building, when a disk of dust and pebbles in orbit around the Sun coalesced into city-sized “planetesimals” — the solid building blocks that clump together to form planets — but had not yet merged into full-sized worlds. Beyond Neptune, this second stage never happened, leaving behind a frozen population of planetesimals. In the deepest TNO survey to date, teams led by PhD candidates from the University of Victoria in Canada, under the guidance of the National Research Council of Canada, and Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff examined a patch of sky simultaneously with Hubble, observing the TNOs’ visible light, and Webb, observing their infrared light. The team of researchers measured the objects' colors, which are like a fingerprint of the surface composition, as well as their sizes and determined their orbits. In the coordinated observations, the teams studied two different types of TNOs. The first, dynamically “cold” TNOs, are on their original, relatively circular orbits around the Sun in the plane of the solar system. The second type, dynamically “hot” TNOs, formed between the current locations of Uranus and Neptune but were pushed outward where they are today when the outer gas giants migrated early in the solar system’s history. Today they reside in highly elliptical orbits and move in and out of the plane of our solar system. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center; Lead Producer: Paul Morris Prior to these observations, astronomers thought that small TNOs from both hot and cold populations would have undergone many collisions, changing their surfaces compared to larger TNOs. But that's not what the observations showed. Instead, the small bodies look like their larger counterparts. This implies that collisions are not changing the surfaces significantly—perhaps because there are fewer collisions than expected, or because the TNOs somehow retain their primordial, pre-collision compositions. The teams are still trying to unravel this mystery. “You could imagine a scenario where getting knocked around and fragmented would change the surface composition, and then you would see a different surface color for tiny TNOs compared to their larger siblings. So it's really fascinating to see that the smallest objects are somehow 'remembering' and preserving the history of how they were made,” said Northern Arizona University PhD candidate Anastasia Morgan, who led the study of color and composition . “These dynamically ‘hot’ TNOs retain a signature of where they were born, even though they’ve been orbitally scrambled since then,” said co-author David Trilling of Northern Arizona University. Both the “hot” and “cold” populations seem to keep the same colors as when they were formed, with little change since the birth of the solar system. The Webb data also allowed researchers to measure the number of objects of each size. They found that the overall size distributions for both populations were surprisingly similar. “It's very interesting that the process of planetesimal formation ends up producing the same distribution of sizes for both cold and hot populations, despite forming in different regions of the early solar system. The process seems to be insensitive to disk conditions, producing similar planetesimal sizes whether the disk is hot or cold, and dense or fluffy,” said University of Victoria PhD candidate Marielle Eduardo, who led the study on size distribution . Researchers also found fewer of these very small bodies than they expected based on some planet formation models. Webb discovered 27 new, remarkably dim TNOs, one so faint it is equivalent to standing on Earth and seeing a small swarm of fireflies on the Moon. The smallest one they observed has a diameter of about 3 miles (5 kilometers), which is about five times smaller than what is possible to detect with the most sensitive ground-based telescopes. This project would not have been possible without Hubble and Webb working together to detect and characterize these TNOs. With Hubble’s sensitivity in visible light and Webb’s in infrared, the space telescopes provide more insights than either can on its own. The Hubble Space Telescope has been operating for over three decades and continues to make ground-breaking discoveries that shape our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble is a project of international cooperation between NASA and ESA (European Space Agency). NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, manages the telescope and mission operations. Lockheed Martin Space, based in Denver, also supports mission operations at Goddard. The Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, which is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, conducts Hubble science operations for NASA. Facebook logo @NASAHubble @NASAHubble Instagram logo @NASAHubble The James Webb Space Telescope is the world’s premier space science observatory. Webb is solving mysteries in our solar system, looking beyond to distant worlds around other stars, and probing the mysterious structures and origins of our universe and our place in it. Webb is an international program led by NASA with its partners, ESA (European Space Agency) and CSA (Canadian Space Agency). Facebook logo @NASAWebb @NASAWebb Instagram logo @NASAWebb To learn more about NASA's space telescopes, visit: https://science.nasa.gov/universe Related Images & Videos Trans-Neptunian Object Illustration This artist’s concept depicts a Trans-Neptunian Object, a small, faint, icy body orbiting the Sun beyond the orbit of Neptune. These objects are so small that even with NASA’s Hubble and Webb space telescopes, they appear only as tiny points of light. Tiny Worlds Discovered by Hubble and Webb This video explains how Hubble and Webb are giving scientists a new look at some of the solar system’s oldest survivors and revealing new clues about how the building blocks of planets, including Earth, first formed. Explore More NASA’s Hubble Finds Kuiper Belt Duo May Be Trio A team of researchers found a potential three-body system in the Kuiper Belt. The system, known as the Altjira, challenges traditional collision theories by suggesting that these triple systems might form directly from the gravitational collapse of material in the early solar disk. NASA’s Webb Reveals the Ancient Surfaces of Trans-Neptunian Objects Within the first two years of science operations, Webb took high-quality spectra of over 75 TNOs and provided the first comprehensive look at what they are made of. Uncovering Icy Objects in the Kuiper Belt Hubble observations of the outskirts of our solar system found a moon orbiting Makemake and several new moons around Pluto. These observations played a critical role in helping NASA plan the New Horizons spacecraft’s flyby of Pluto and beyond. Hubble Harvests Distant Solar System Objects Astronomers using clever techniques to cull the data archives of NASA's Hubble Space Telescope have added 14 new TNOs to the catalog. Kuiper Belt: Exploration The Kuiper Belt is a doughnut-shaped region of icy objects beyond the orbit of Neptune. It is home to Pluto and most of the known dwarf planets and some comets. Share Details Last Updated Sep 21, 2026 Editor Andrea Gianopoulos Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Claire Andreoli NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland claire.andreoli@nasa.gov Ann Jenkins, Christine Pulliam Space Telescope Science Institute Baltimore, Maryland Related Terms Hubble Space Telescope Astrophysics Astrophysics Division Goddard Space Flight Center James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Small Bodies of the Solar System The Solar System Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Hubble Hubble Space Telescope Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe. Hubble Science Highlights Hubble's most notable scientific discoveries reflect the broad range of research and the breakthroughs it has achieved. Hubble Images Explore Hubble's iconic images of the universe, and view photos of mission operations and astronauts servicing Hubble in space. Hubble News

Explore Webb 1 min read Fast and Furious Star Formation in Starburst Galaxies To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video While our Sun was born almost five billion years ago, there are brand new stars forming today. Within our Milky Way galaxy, the vibrant glowing regions such as the Orion, Eagle, and Carina Nebulas are places where stars are currently being born. In some galaxies, such as many elliptical galaxies, there is little star formation taking place. Other galaxies, like our Milky Way, have a moderate amount of newborn stars. Still others, called starburst galaxies, are experiencing a sudden and short-lived period of rampant stellar birth. In this video, delve into galaxies where the fast rate of star formation produces furious activity. These starburst galaxies are especially well observed in infrared light by NASA's James Webb Space Telescope, revealing fine details of the dynamic star-forming regions. In particular, Webb's observations of galaxy Messier 82 peer through the dust clouds to reveal its inner structure and capture the full extent of its spectacular and starburst-induced galactic wind. This video features a 3D visualization of Messier 82 created by a team of astronomers and artists at the Space Telescope Science Institute. Explore these topics more with these resources: News Release (June 2026): NASA’s Webb Pinpoints Millions of Stars Within Cigar Galaxy News Release (June 2025): NASA’s Webb ‘UNCOVERs’ Galaxy Population Driving Cosmic Renovation News Release (January 2024): NASA’s Webb Depicts Staggering Structure in 19 Nearby Spiral Galaxies Release Date August 26, 2026 Credit Producer: Frank Summers (STScI), Gregory Bacon (STScI); Script Writer: Frank Summers (STScI); Editor: Danielle Kirshenblat (STScI); Visualization: Leah Hustak (STScI), Christian Nieves (STScI), Joseph Olmsted (STScI), Alyssa Pagan (STScI); Narration: Ralf Crawford (STScI); Science Advisor: Adam Smercina (STScI); Education/Outreach Advisor: Christopher Britt (STScI), Alexander Cotnoir (STScI), Abigail Major (STScI) Downloads Video: 3840 × 2160, 60 FPS mp4 (352.06 MB) Video: 1920 × 1080, 60 FPS mp4 (134.17 MB) Video: Vertical Format, 1080 × 1920, 30 FPS mp4 (83.42 MB) Audio Description mp4 (218.68 MB) Audio Description mp3 (816.63 KB) Audio Description docx (17.63 KB) Captions srt (4.22 KB) Captions vtt (5.39 KB) Image: Title Frame, 1280 × 720 png (1.21 MB) Image: Credits, 1920 × 1080 png (249.44 KB) Image: Title Frame - Vertical Format, 1080 × 1920 png (1.58 MB) Image: Credits - Vertical Format, 1080 × 1920 png (2.59 MB) Transcript txt (2.18 KB) Transcript docx (15.56 KB) Share Details Last Updated Sep 22, 2026 Location NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Contact Media Laura Betz NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Greenbelt, Maryland laura.e.betz@nasa.gov Related Terms James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Galaxies Sensing the Universe & Multimessenger Astronomy Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Webb James Webb Space Telescope Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the… Science Overview Webb Observatory Webb Image Galleries

NASA’s Webb Detects Methane on Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has collected its first mid-infrared chemical fingerprint of an interstellar object during a recent revisit to comet 3I/ATLAS. The team’s results published recently in The Astrophysical Journal Letters. The observations were taken using Webb’s MIRI (Mid-Infrared Instrument) on two separate dates as the comet traveled back out of our solar system after whipping around the Sun (post-perihelion). The first observation occurred Dec. 15 to 16, when the comet was about 205 million miles (329 million kilometers) from the Sun. This was followed by a second observation Dec. 27, when the comet was about 236 million miles (379 million kilometers) from the Sun. For the first time on an interstellar visitor, Webb directly detected methane gas. Methane is highly volatile, meaning it sublimates from solid ice into a gas very easily. Its delayed appearance in comet 3I/ATLAS suggests it was buried below the comet’s top surface layer and protected from sublimation until heat from the comet’s close pass to the Sun reached deeper parts of the icy subsurface. The amount of methane relative to water found is surprisingly high, with few similar analogs in our own solar system. Webb’s observations also confirmed that comet 3I/ATLAS remains unusually rich in carbon dioxide, releasing far more carbon dioxide relative to water when compared to typical solar system comets. Both these findings point to a very different formation environment and chemistry than the vast majority of comets that formed within our solar system. Additionally, Webb observed a sharp decline in gas production as comet 3I/ATLAS moved farther from the Sun, with water showing the most pronounced drop. This is expected behavior for an object like this – as the comet gets less heat from the Sun, the surface gets colder and less ice is being vaporized. Water, which is less volatile than methane or carbon dioxide, is quicker to “shut off” its gas production. Webb observed comet 3I/ATLAS using MIRI’s Medium Resolution Spectrometer, a powerful instrument designed to break infrared light into its component wavelengths. This spectrometer is an integral field unit, which provides a spectrum at every point in a small patch of sky, allowing the team to simultaneously measure what gases are present and visualize their distribution around the comet’s nucleus. The top image shows interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS as seen with MIRI (Mid-Infrared Instrument) on NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope, along with contours that illustrate where different gases were located at the time the comet was viewed. Water vapor spreads far beyond the nucleus because much of it is released from icy grains in the coma, while carbon dioxide and methane are most concentrated near the comet’s nucleus. The bottom image shows the spectrum, with the labels indicating the features from the various gases that Webb found escaping from the comet. Credit: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI, M. Belyakov (Caltech), I. Wong (STScI), Image Processing: A. Pagan (STScI) Alise Fisher June 1, 2026 10:57AM Categories

How NASA’s Webb Helped Rule Out Asteroid’s Chance of 2032 Lunar Impact Editor’s Note: This post highlights data from Webb science in progress, which has not yet been through the peer-review process. These results were reported as part of NASA’s role in the International Asteroid Warning Network. NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope recently made new observations of the asteroid 2024 YR4, which we already knew poses no significant threat to Earth in 2032 and beyond. Webb’s new observations – among the faintest ever observations of an asteroid, in a challenging application of the telescope’s unique capabilities – helped determine that the asteroid also will safely pass the Moon in 2032. We spoke with Andy Rivkin of the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, and Julien de Wit of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, the two co-principal investigators of the Webb Director’s Discretionary Time program used to refine our knowledge of the asteroid’s orbit. Plane-of-sky position and associated uncertainties for asteroid 2024 YR4 on 2026 February 26. Stack exposures of JWST’s 2026 February 26 observations showing the high-significance detection of asteroid 2024 YR4 (green) offset by ~22 pixels (about 0.5 arcseconds) from the position that would have supported a non-zero 2032 lunar impact probability (red). NASA, ESA, CSA, A. Rivkin (JHUAPL), and J. de Wit (MIT) What is most important for people to know about these Webb observations? We requested director’s discretionary time on Webb because there was a possibility for 2024 YR4 to impact the Moon in 2032. Without Webb, we would have needed to wait until 2028 with a large amount of uncertainty about what might happen, but with these observations that uncertainty is removed. Webb first constrained the asteroid’s size in 2025 and has now extended its observational arc to refine the orbit of 2024 YR4, demonstrating in practice how its sensitivity can support planetary-defense assessments for extremely faint objects long before they become observable again from Earth. Why is Webb the only observatory that can measure the asteroid’s position prior to 2028? 2024 YR4 is exceedingly faint right now, reflecting about as much light as an almond at the distance of the Moon. It glows at a magnitude of about 30, which is 4 billion times fainter than the faintest star visible to the unaided eye. Webb is the only observatory that could hope to make these measurements, as it is the only one with the required sensitivity and stability combined with precise moving-target tracking needed to follow and study objects like this. This allowed Webb to make several hour-long exposures of 2024 YR4 without the asteroid moving even a pixel in any of them. No other observatory can make these measurements until 2028 during the asteroid’s next passage through the inner solar system. How does the Webb data enable us to better predict 2024 YR4’s trajectory? Two things help us do a better job of predicting the paths of asteroids: getting very accurate positions and increasing the amount of time over which they’ve been observed. These measurements of 2024 YR4 are very precise, and even more importantly extend the date of the most recent observations from May 2025 to late February 2026. This almost doubles the length of time the asteroid 2024 YR4 has been observed and allows orbital dynamicists to be very confident in predicting where it will be in 2032. What have you learned? With these observations, NASA has further refined the orbit of 2024 YR4 well enough to know it will miss the Moon in 2032, meaning a lunar impact will be one fewer thing for satellite operators — as well as astronauts — to worry about in the future. Also critically important, however, was the experience we gained using Webb to make these measurements. The extreme faintness of 2024 YR4 at the time of the measurements provided a challenge because it is difficult or impossible to get good images containing both something as faint as the asteroid and something as bright as some of the stars used to precisely measure its location on the sky. The excellent quality of Webb’s NIRCam (Near-Infrared Camera) design and optics allowed us to develop techniques that worked wonders, however, and that gives us confidence that we can make such measurements again if necessary in the future, and we will not need to learn how to do it from scratch. How do the Webb observations fit within the larger picture of the study of this asteroid (and other near-Earth asteroids)? Webb observations of 2024 YR4 were critical for our understanding of that asteroid. Specifically, they helped to constrain the object’s size and its orbit. In a larger sense, these observations demonstrate the utility of Webb for planetary defense — its unique capabilities for measuring the position and physical properties of an object beyond the capabilities of any other facility. Webb provides a unique capability to support such assessments well before objects return to the inner solar system. If and when NASA’s planetary defense assets discover another potentially hazardous object of interest, we will know that we could make these measurements in practice, not just in theory, and we have gained important experience in designing and analyzing those measurements. Looking at an even larger picture, Webb is not the only NASA Astrophysics mission with planetary defense applications. For example, NASA’s next flagship science mission, the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope , will capture asteroids as it surveys the universe and could also help better constrain their orbits. And NASA’s Habitable Worlds Observatory mission concept will have unprecedented sensitivity unlike any space telescope before it, a powerful potential tool to help with earlier orbit refinement. NASA is also developing the Near-Earth Object Surveyor, bringing NASA’s space telescope heritage directly to bear on the asteroid hazard and demonstrating the strong collaboration across NASA Science in meeting NASA’s planetary defense objectives. About the Authors Andy Rivkin, a planetary astronomer at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, and Julien de Wit, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, are co-principal investigators of the Webb Director’s Discretionary Time program (DD 9441) used to study asteroid 2024 YR4. Related Links Planetary Defense blog post Asteroid 2024 YR4 Minor Planet Center Database Entry April 2025 Webb blog post Research Notes by A. S. Rivkin et al. NASA Webb Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center March 6, 2026 3:27PM Categories

New NASA Asteroid Observations Eliminate Chance of 2032 Lunar Impact Using data from NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope observations collected on Feb. 18 and 26, experts from NASA’s Center for Near-Earth Object Studies at the agency’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Southern California have refined near-Earth asteroid 2024 YR4’s orbit and are ruling out a chance of lunar impact on Dec. 22, 2032. With the new data, 2024 YR4 is expected to pass by the lunar surface at a distance of 13,200 miles (21,200 km). This update reflects improved precision in our understanding of where the asteroid is expected to be in 2032 rather than a shift in its orbital path. Previous analyses, made before the incorporation of these new observations, suggested 2024 YR4 had a 4.3% chance of lunar impact on this date. Animation of asteroid 2024 YR4’s potential locations on December 22, 2032. The animation demonstrates how the additional data from the February 2026 James Webb Space Telescope observations have increased the certainty of where the asteroid will be in the future and decreased the range of possible locations. With this new data, 2024 YR4 is expected to pass by the Moon at a distance of 13,200 miles (21,200 km) and lunar impact is no longer a possibility. NASA/JPL Center for Near-Earth Object Studies The observation team, led by the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, used Webb to capture the two additional observations of 2024 YR4 in an application of the telescope’s unique capabilities. Since spring of 2025, the asteroid has been unobservable from both Earth and space-based observatories except for this use of Webb to make among the faintest ever observations of an asteroid. Asteroid 2024 YR4 was discovered in late 2024 by the NASA-funded Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System station in Chile. In early 2025, the information available about the asteroid’s trajectory indicated the asteroid had a small, but notable chance of impacting Earth. Over time with more observations collected by observatories around the world, NASA concluded the object poses no significant impact risk to Earth on Dec. 22, 2032, or through the next century. It’s typical to have initial observations and risk models updated once additional observational data is gathered and models are able to be refined. Molly Wasser March 5, 2026 10:43AM Categories

NASA’s Webb Space Telescope Observes Interstellar Comet NASA/James Webb Space Telescope NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope observed interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS Aug. 6, with its Near-Infrared Spectrograph instrument. The research team has been analyzing insights from Webb’s data, and a preprint is available online . Webb is one of NASA’s space telescopes observing this comet, together providing more information about its size, physical properties, and chemical makeup. For example, NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope and the recently launched SPHEREx mission have also observed the comet. While the comet poses no threat to Earth, NASA’s space telescopes help support the agency’s ongoing mission to find, track, and better understand solar system objects. Alise Fisher NASA Headquarters, Washington 202-358-2546 alise.m.fisher@nasa.gov Abbey Interrante August 25, 2025 4:30PM Categories

New Moon Discovered Orbiting Uranus Using NASA’s Webb Telescope Editor’s Note: This post highlights data from Webb science in progress, which has not yet been through the peer-review process. Using NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope, a team led by the Southwest Research Institute (SwRI) has identified a previously unknown moon orbiting Uranus, expanding the planet’s known satellite family to 29. The detection was made during a Webb observation Feb. 2, 2025. “This object was spotted in a series of 10 40-minute long-exposure images captured by the Near-Infrared Camera (NIRCam),” said Maryame El Moutamid, a lead scientist in SwRI’s Solar System Science and Exploration Division based in Boulder, Colorado. “It’s a small moon but a significant discovery, which is something that even NASA’s Voyager 2 spacecraft didn’t see during its flyby nearly 40 years ago.” This timelapse animation shows the newly discovered moon of Uranus, designated S/2025 U1, as well as 13 of the 28 other known moons orbiting the planet. The observations by NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s NIRCam (Near-Infrared Camera) were taken over the course of about 6 hours on Feb. 2, 2025, under program ID 6379 (principal investigator: M. El Moutamid). The animation is comprised of data taken with NIRCam’s wide band F150W2 filter, which transmits infrared wavelengths from about 1.0 to 2.4 microns. Due to the drastic differences in brightness levels, the animation is a composite of three different treatments of the data, allowing the viewer to see details in the planetary atmosphere, the surrounding rings, and the orbiting moons. View video details and download options. NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI, M. El Moutamid (SwRI), M. Hedman (University of Idaho). Animation: J. DePasquale (STScI). The newly discovered moon is estimated to be just six miles (10 kilometers) in diameter, assuming it has a similar reflectivity (albedo) to Uranus’ other small satellites. That tiny size likely rendered it invisible to Voyager 2 and other telescopes. “No other planet has as many small inner moons as Uranus, and their complex inter-relationships with the rings hint at a chaotic history that blurs the boundary between a ring system and a system of moons,” said Matthew Tiscareno of the SETI Institute in Mountain View, California, a member of the research team. “Moreover, the new moon is smaller and much fainter than the smallest of the previously known inner moons, making it likely that even more complexity remains to be discovered.” Astronomers using NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope discovered a new moon orbiting Uranus in images taken by Webb’s NIRCam (Near-Infrared Camera). This image shows the moon, designated S/2025 U1, as well as 13 of the 28 other known moons orbiting the planet. (The small moon Cordelia orbits just inside the outermost ring, but is not visible in these views due to glare from the rings.) Due to the drastic differences in brightness levels, the image is a composite of three different treatments of the data, allowing the viewer to see details in the planetary atmosphere, the surrounding rings, and the orbiting moons. The data was taken with NIRCam’s wide band F150W2 filter that transmits infrared wavelengths from about 1.0 to 2.4 microns. View image details and download options. Image: NASA, ESA, CSA, Maryame El Moutamid (SwRI), Matthew Hedman (University of Idaho); Image Processing: Joseph DePasquale (STScI) The new moon is the 14th member of the intricate system of small moons orbiting inward of the largest moons Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania, and Oberon. (All the moons of Uranus are named after characters from Shakespeare and Alexander Pope.) “It’s located about 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) from Uranus’ center, orbiting the planet’s equatorial plane between the orbits of Ophelia (which is just outside of Uranus’ main ring system) and Bianca,” said El Moutamid. “Its nearly circular orbit suggests it may have formed near its current location.” A name for the newly found moon will need to be approved by the International Astronomical Union (IAU), the leading authority in assigning official names and designations to astronomical objects. “Through this and other programs , Webb is providing a new eye on the outer solar system. This discovery comes as part of Webb’s General Observer program , which allows scientists worldwide to propose investigations using the telescope’s cutting-edge instruments. The NIRCam instrument’s high resolution and infrared sensitivity make it especially adept at detecting faint, distant objects that were beyond the reach of previous observatories,” said El Moutamid. “Looking forward, the discovery of this moon underscores how modern astronomy continues to build upon the legacy of missions like Voyager 2, which flew past Uranus on Jan. 24, 1986, and gave humanity its first close-up look at this mysterious world. Now, nearly four decades later, the James Webb Space Telescope is pushing that frontier even farther.” About the Author Maryame El Moutamid is a lead scientist at the Southwest Research Institute and principal investigator on Webb observing program 6379 to study the rings and moons of Uranus. NASA Webb Mission Team Goddard Space Flight Center August 19, 2025 11:00AM Categories

PRESS RELEASE Press Release More Info. CAREERS Come, become a part of the workforce of the nation's prestigious space agency-be it in the technical or administrative areas? ISRO has several openings for recruitment to a plethora of posts. All recruitment notices will be published here. More Info. STUDENTS ISRO committed to encourage students in creating awareness in the space technology and applications.They are the future hopes for applying technologies for social and economic up-liftment of the country.Several programmes are conceived for students to engage in STEM activities and learning. More Info. TENDERS This is a portal that carries all notifications related to tenders, corrigendums etc.for procurement related activities of all ISRO Centres spread across the country. It will be a frequently updated portal. More Info. Latest News Chairman ISRO/ Secretary DOS participated in the International Space Summit at Paris during September 9-10, 2026 Chairman ISRO/ Secretary DOS participated in the International Space Summit at Paris during September 9-10, 2026 EOS-06/Oceansat-3 detects impact of the developing El Niño on Marine Productivity in the Equatorial Pacific Ocean EOS-06/Oceansat-3 detects impact of the developing El Niño on Marine Productivity in the Equatorial Pacific Ocean Successful Hot Test of CE20 Cryogenic Engine for LVM3 M7 Mission Successful Hot Test of CE20 Cryogenic Engine for LVM3 M7 Mission ZeeDP 2.0 Space Science Meet held at SAC, Ahmedabad ZeeDP 2.0 Space Science Meet held at SAC, Ahmedabad National Anubhav Awards, 2026 National Anubhav Awards, 2026 Third and final orbit manoeuvring of EOS-05 spacecraft Third and final orbit manoeuvring of EOS-05 spacecraft Clarification regarding media reports on concerns relating to Space Sector Reforms and the role of ISRO Clarification regarding media reports on concerns relating to Space Sector Reforms and the role of ISRO Second orbit manoeuvring of EOS-05 spacecraft Second orbit manoeuvring of EOS-05 spacecraft Orbit manoeuvring of EOS-05 spacecraft Orbit manoeuvring of EOS-05 spacecraft ISRO successfully conducts hot test of Semicryogenic Engine Power Head Test Article at full thrust level ISRO successfully conducts hot test of Semicryogenic Engine Power Head Test Article at full thrust level GSLV-F17/EOS-05 MISSION GSLV-F17/EOS-05 MISSION Aditya-L1 Catches the Sun's Early Warning Signs Before Solar Flares Aditya-L1 Catches the Sun's Early Warning Signs Before Solar Flares Unusual Stratospheric Ozone Enhancement Over the North Bay of Bengal: Insights from the Indian ST/MST Radar Network and Balloon-Borne Experiments Unusual Stratospheric Ozone Enhancement Over the North Bay of Bengal: Insights from the Indian ST/MST Radar Network and Balloon-Borne Experiments 3 rd National Space Day 2026 celebrated at Ahmedabad 3 rd National Space Day 2026 celebrated at Ahmedabad ISRO and NASA Celebrate One Successful Year of NISAR Mission on Orbit ISRO and NASA Celebrate One Successful Year of NISAR Mission on Orbit Atmospheric Re-entry of LVM3 M5 Upper Stage on 30 July 2026 Atmospheric Re-entry of LVM3 M5 Upper Stage on 30 July 2026 ISRO tests an improved version of the first stage of Small Satellite Launch vehicle (SSLV) ISRO tests an improved version of the first stage of Small Satellite Launch vehicle (SSLV) India – U.S. Civil Space Joint Working Group meeting at ISRO Headquarters, Bengaluru India – U.S. Civil Space Joint Working Group meeting at ISRO Headquarters, Bengaluru Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon 2026 – Grand Finale Concludes Successfully Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon 2026 – Grand Finale Concludes Successfully ISRO Robotics Challenge – URSC (IRoC-U) 2026 Inspires Young Innovators to Shape India's Future in Space Exploration ISRO Robotics Challenge – URSC (IRoC-U) 2026 Inspires Young Innovators to Shape India's Future in Space Exploration ISRO Conducts START Capacity Building Workshop-2026 at IIRS, Dehradun ISRO Conducts START Capacity Building Workshop-2026 at IIRS, Dehradun NISAR S-Band SAR Data Products Release NISAR S-Band SAR Data Products Release Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon (BAH) – 2026: Shortlisted Teams for Grand Finale Scheduled at NRSC Hyderabad during 6th & 7th August, 2026 Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon (BAH) – 2026: Shortlisted Teams for Grand Finale Scheduled at NRSC Hyderabad during 6th & 7th August, 2026 119 KB First National Workshop on Microgravity Research First National Workshop on Microgravity Research First private orbital launch lifts off from Sriharikota First private orbital launch lifts off from Sriharikota Aditya-L1 Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for the third AO cycle observations Aditya-L1 Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for the third AO cycle observations Special YUVIKA Programme for Oman Students Special YUVIKA Programme for Oman Students Successful accomplishment of Major Qualification Tests Crew Module systems of Gaganyaan Mission Successful accomplishment of Major Qualification Tests Crew Module systems of Gaganyaan Mission ISRO successfully conducts Integrated Main Parachute Air Drop Test (IMAT) for Gaganyaan Programme ISRO successfully conducts Integrated Main Parachute Air Drop Test (IMAT) for Gaganyaan Programme ISRO conducts Flight Acceptance Test of Cryogenic Engine successfully for next LVM3 mission ISRO conducts Flight Acceptance Test of Cryogenic Engine successfully for next LVM3 mission ISRO conducts ground test for new sub-orbital solid motor-based test vehicle ISRO conducts ground test for new sub-orbital solid motor-based test vehicle Chandrayaan-3's Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer measurements connect the composition at Shiv Shakti Statio to the first Lunar Meteorite ALHA 81005 Chandrayaan-3's Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer measurements connect the composition at Shiv Shakti Statio to the first Lunar Meteorite ALHA 81005 Iron Fluorescence on the Sun During Massive Solar Flares: Aditya-L1 Observation Iron Fluorescence on the Sun During Massive Solar Flares: Aditya-L1 Observation ISRO successfully conducted hot test of Semicryogenic Engine Power Head Test Article at higher thrust level ISRO successfully conducted hot test of Semicryogenic Engine Power Head Test Article at higher thrust level BRICS Heads of Space Agencies 2026 Conclude Meeting in Bengaluru, Advancing Discussions on Remote Sensing Satellite Constellation and Space Sustainability BRICS Heads of Space Agencies 2026 Conclude Meeting in Bengaluru, Advancing Discussions on Remote Sensing Satellite Constellation and Space Sustainability BRICS Heads of Space Agencies to gather in India to Strengthen Space Cooperation BRICS Heads of Space Agencies to gather in India to Strengthen Space Cooperation XPoSat Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for the second AO cycle observations XPoSat Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for the second AO cycle observations ISRO Participation in RISE Conclave 2026, Bengaluru ISRO Participation in RISE Conclave 2026, Bengaluru NRSC Conducts Capacity Building Programme on Forest Fire Detection and Burnt Area Mapping for Bhutan Officials NRSC Conducts Capacity Building Programme on Forest Fire Detection and Burnt Area Mapping for Bhutan Officials ISRO and IIG Jointly Launch Space Weather Summer School 2026 to Nurture Future Space Scientists ISRO and IIG Jointly Launch Space Weather Summer School 2026 to Nurture Future Space Scientists 13 th Meeting of the NESAC Society 13 th Meeting of the NESAC Society International Planetary Data Alliance (IPDA) 2026 Concludes Successful Workshop & Steering Committee meeting at ISTRAC-ISRO International Planetary Data Alliance (IPDA) 2026 Concludes Successful Workshop & Steering Committee meeting at ISTRAC-ISRO Chandrayaan-2 Dual Frequency Synthetic Aperture Radar (DFSAR) Observations Reveal Subsurface Ice in Lunar South Polar Regions Chandrayaan-2 Dual Frequency Synthetic Aperture Radar (DFSAR) Observations Reveal Subsurface Ice in Lunar South Polar Regions Announcement of Expression of Interest (EoI) for PSLV Transfer of Technology, on IN-SPACe Digital Platform Announcement of Expression of Interest (EoI) for PSLV Transfer of Technology, on IN-SPACe Digital Platform Chandrayaan-3 "Hop" Experiment Reveals Hidden Lunar Secrets: Scientists Uncover Regolith Heterogeneity at Moon’s South Pole Chandrayaan-3 "Hop" Experiment Reveals Hidden Lunar Secrets: Scientists Uncover Regolith Heterogeneity at Moon’s South Pole Young Scientists Programme (YUva VIgyani KAryakram - YUVIKA) 2026 Young Scientists Programme (YUva VIgyani KAryakram - YUVIKA) 2026 ISRO at National Technology Day 2026 ISRO at National Technology Day 2026 IIRS Academic Meet (IAM)-2026 IIRS Academic Meet (IAM)-2026 Workshop on Indigenisation of IT Applications Workshop on Indigenisation of IT Applications The 2 nd selection list for YUVIKA-2026 The 2 nd selection list for YUVIKA-2026 376 KB ISRO and TIFR Sign MoU for Collaboration in Space Science and Related Technologies ISRO and TIFR Sign MoU for Collaboration in Space Science and Related Technologies International Conference on Spacecraft Mission Operations - SMOPS-2026 International Conference on Spacecraft Mission Operations - SMOPS-2026 Indian Space Situational Awareness Report (ISSAR) for 2025 Released Indian Space Situational Awareness Report (ISSAR) for 2025 Released Selection List for YUVIKA 2026 Selection List for YUVIKA 2026 191 KB ISRO’s Achievements during FY 2025-2026 ISRO’s Achievements during FY 2025-2026 ISRO conducts Second Integrated Air Drop Test (IADT-02) for Gaganyaan ISRO conducts Second Integrated Air Drop Test (IADT-02) for Gaganyaan ISRO Conferred AIMA Special Award for Public Service Excellence - 2025 ISRO Conferred AIMA Special Award for Public Service Excellence - 2025 National Learning Week - “SADHANA SAPTAH” at ISRO National Learning Week - “SADHANA SAPTAH” at ISRO MISSION MITRA by ISRO Mapping of Interoperable Traits and Response Assessment (MITRA) MISSION MITRA by ISRO Mapping of Interoperable Traits and Response Assessment (MITRA) Aditya-L1 Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for the second AO cycle observations Aditya-L1 Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for the second AO cycle observations IN-SPACe Short-Term Skill Development Course on Essentials of Space Data Product and Services IN-SPACe Short-Term Skill Development Course on Essentials of Space Data Product and Services 1.88 MB Interaction of India Leadership Council (ILC) members with Secretary, DoS/Chairman, ISRO Interaction of India Leadership Council (ILC) members with Secretary, DoS/Chairman, ISRO User Interaction Meet – 2026 (Jointly organised by NRSC/ ISRO and NSIL/DoS) User Interaction Meet – 2026 (Jointly organised by NRSC/ ISRO and NSIL/DoS) IRNSS-1F successfully completed its mission life of 10 years IRNSS-1F successfully completed its mission life of 10 years Secretary, DOS/ Chairman, ISRO Inaugurated START-2026 Event Secretary, DOS/ Chairman, ISRO Inaugurated START-2026 Event ISRO conducts sea level test of cryogenic engine at 22 tonne thrust level with full area nozzle ISRO conducts sea level test of cryogenic engine at 22 tonne thrust level with full area nozzle Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) New Delhi signs Framework Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation in Space Medicine and Research Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) New Delhi signs Framework Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation in Space Medicine and Research Inauguration of ISRO’s Space Science and Technology Awareness Training (START 2026) programme on 11th March 2026 Inauguration of ISRO’s Space Science and Technology Awareness Training (START 2026) programme on 11 th March 2026 Signing of ESA-ISRO Agreement on Joint Calibration/Validation Activities and Scientific Studies for EO Missions Signing of ESA-ISRO Agreement on Joint Calibration/Validation Activities and Scientific Studies for EO Missions ISRO-EUMETSAT Joint Science Cooperation Meet ISRO-EUMETSAT Joint Science Cooperation Meet ISRO showcased its prestigious achievements and advancements in “Pragatisheel Chhattisgarh 2026” at Janjgir-Champa, Chhattisgarh ISRO showcased its prestigious achievements and advancements in “Pragatisheel Chhattisgarh 2026” at Janjgir-Champa, Chhattisgarh Pearl Jubilee Celebration of CSSTEAP Pearl Jubilee Celebration of CSSTEAP Inauguration of IIRS Academic Building at Dehradun Inauguration of IIRS Academic Building at Dehradun ISRO Conducted the 23 rd National Space Science Symposium (NSSS-2026) at NESAC, Umiam, Meghalaya ISRO Conducted the 23 rd National Space Science Symposium (NSSS-2026) at NESAC, Umiam, Meghalaya PSLV related Update PSLV related Update NVS-02 Spacecraft: On-Orbit Observations and Apex Committee Recommendations NVS-02 Spacecraft: On-Orbit Observations and Apex Committee Recommendations Announcement on START-2026 Inauguration Announcement on START-2026 Inauguration Aditya-L1 measurementshelp to explain unusual dawn-time geomagnetic disturbances during strong solar storms Aditya-L1 measurementshelp to explain unusual dawn-time geomagnetic disturbances during strong solar storms Soil Moisture Products at 100m resolution from NISAR data Soil Moisture Products at 100m resolution from NISAR data Inauguration of Library Training Programme for ISRO’s library technical staff at INFLIBNET Centre, Gandhinagar Inauguration of Library Training Programme for ISRO’s library technical staff at INFLIBNET Centre, Gandhinagar Inauguration of new NSIL office at GIFT City, Gandhinagar, Gujarat Inauguration of new NSIL office at GIFT City, Gandhinagar, Gujarat ISRO conducts testing of sub-scale thrust chamber for LOX-Methane Engine ISRO conducts testing of sub-scale thrust chamber for LOX-Methane Engine Achievements of Department of Space - 2025 Achievements of Department of Space - 2025 Announcement of Opportunity: Indian Microgravity Experiments – IMEx-2026 Announcement of Opportunity: Indian Microgravity Experiments – IMEx-2026 International conference on Celebrating Ten years of AstroSat International conference on Celebrating Ten years of AstroSat Inauguration of Management Development Programme for ISRO's Junior level & Middle level Scientist/Engineers at Centre for Organisational Development (COD), Hyderabad Inauguration of Management Development Programme for ISRO's Junior level & Middle level Scientist/Engineers at Centre for Organisational Development (COD), Hyderabad Call for Registration: ISRO START 2026 Programme for Academic Institutions Call for Registration: ISRO START 2026 Programme for Academic Institutions ISRO and ESA jointly organise ISRO-ESA Heliophysics Workshop on Aditya-L1, Solar Orbiter and Proba-3 ISRO and ESA jointly organise ISRO-ESA Heliophysics Workshop on Aditya-L1, Solar Orbiter and Proba-3 ISRO’s Aditya-L1 decodes the Impact of a Powerful Solar Storm on Earth’s Invisible Magnetic Shield ISRO’s Aditya-L1 decodes the Impact of a Powerful Solar Storm on Earth’s Invisible Magnetic Shield Overview of PSLV-C62 / EOS-N1 Mission Overview of PSLV-C62 / EOS-N1 Mission Aditya-L1 Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for the first AO cycle observations Aditya-L1 Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for the first AO cycle observations India’s Cosmic Dust Experiment - Ground-breaking Hunt for Interplanetary Secrets! India’s Cosmic Dust Experiment - Ground-breaking Hunt for Interplanetary Secrets! ISRO conducts Ground Test of SSLV Third Stage ISRO conducts Ground Test of SSLV Third Stage Successful accomplishment of Drogue Parachute Deployment Tests for Gaganyaan Successful accomplishment of Drogue Parachute Deployment Tests for Gaganyaan LVM3-M6 / BlueBird Block-2 Mission LVM3-M6 / BlueBird Block-2 Mission ISRO Academia Day - 2025 ISRO Academia Day - 2025 Chandrayaan-3's RAMBHA-LP Instrument Delivers Critical 'Ground Truth' on the Moon’s Plasma Environment Chandrayaan-3's RAMBHA-LP Instrument Delivers Critical 'Ground Truth' on the Moon’s Plasma Environment Recent Visit of Prof Rao R Tummala, Advisor to India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) at Space Applications Centre (SAC) Recent Visit of Prof Rao R Tummala, Advisor to India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) at Space Applications Centre (SAC) India’s Aditya-L1 Joins Global Effort in Landmark Solar Storm Study India’s Aditya-L1 Joins Global Effort in Landmark Solar Storm Study NISAR Mission enters Science Phase NISAR Mission enters Science Phase Two-day training on Utilization of Remote Sensing and GIS tools for Officials of Indian Institute of Public Health, Shillong Two-day training on Utilization of Remote Sensing and GIS tools for Officials of Indian Institute of Public Health, Shillong Visit of MyGov’s National Space Day Quiz 2025 winners to Satish Dhawan Space Centre SHAR Visit of MyGov’s National Space Day Quiz 2025 winners to Satish Dhawan Space Centre SHAR Vice-Chair of Japan’s Committee on National Space Policy met Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS Vice-Chair of Japan’s Committee on National Space Policy met Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS Secretary DOS/ Chairman ISRO meeting with State Secretary to Federal Minister for Research Technology and Space, Germany Secretary DOS/ Chairman ISRO meeting with State Secretary to Federal Minister for Research Technology and Space, Germany Observations of the Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS with the PRL 1.2m telescope at Mount Abu Observations of the Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS with the PRL 1.2m telescope at Mount Abu Successful Demonstration of Boot-Strap Mode Start of CE20 Cryogenic engine Successful Demonstration of Boot-Strap Mode Start of CE20 Cryogenic engine Visit of Jagriti Yatra Participants to Space Port of India, SDSC SHAR Visit of Jagriti Yatra Participants to Space Port of India, SDSC SHAR Chandrayaan-3 Fly-by Chandrayaan-3 Fly-by Successful accomplishment of key development test in Integrated Main Parachute Airdrop Test (IMAT) series for Gaganyaan mission Successful accomplishment of key development test in Integrated Main Parachute Airdrop Test (IMAT) series for Gaganyaan mission ISRO Offers Advanced Data Products for Deeper Understanding of the Lunar Polar Region ISRO Offers Advanced Data Products for Deeper Understanding of the Lunar Polar Region Release of ROCERS (Remote sensing enabled Online Chemical Emergency Response System) for Kerala by Government of Kerala on 11th October, 2025 Release of ROCERS (Remote sensing enabled Online Chemical Emergency Response System) for Kerala by Government of Kerala on 11th October, 2025 ISRO Organised National Science Meet on Venus Orbiter Mission (VOM) ISRO Organised National Science Meet on Venus Orbiter Mission (VOM) NRSC/ ISRO signs MoU with BCCL and CMPDI on use of Satellite data for Surface Coal Fire & Land Subsidence Mapping in Jharia Coal Field NRSC/ ISRO signs MoU with BCCL and CMPDI on use of Satellite data for Surface Coal Fire & Land Subsidence Mapping in Jharia Coal Field LVM3-M5/CMS-03 MISSION LVM3-M5/CMS-03 MISSION Curtain Raiser on ESTIC-2025 focussing on Space Technologies theme Curtain Raiser on ESTIC-2025 focussing on Space Technologies theme Chandrayaan-2 Observes Effects of the Coronal Mass Ejections from the Sun on the Lunar Exosphere Chandrayaan-2 Observes Effects of the Coronal Mass Ejections from the Sun on the Lunar Exosphere ISRO organises XPoSat National Meet and Opens up the Scientific Data from the XPoSat Mission along with Announcement of Opportunity for National Guest Observer ISRO organises XPoSat National Meet and Opens up the Scientific Data from the XPoSat Mission along with Announcement of Opportunity for National Guest Observer XPoSat Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for First AO cycle observations XPoSat Mission: Announcement of Opportunity (AO) soliciting proposals for First AO cycle observations 227 KB NESAC User Interaction Meet 2025 (NeUIM-2025) NESAC User Interaction Meet 2025 (NeUIM-2025) Celebrating a Decade of India’s first Astronomy Observatory AstroSat Celebrating a Decade of India’s first Astronomy Observatory AstroSat Announcement of Opportunity (AO) for utilizing archival data of Planet Venus for scientific analysis Announcement of Opportunity (AO) for utilizing archival data of Planet Venus for scientific analysis CII International Space Conference 2025: Showcasing ISRO’s Leadership and Global Collaboration CII International Space Conference 2025: Showcasing ISRO’s Leadership and Global Collaboration NSSS 2026: Last date for registration is extended till 30th September 2025 NSSS 2026: Last date for registration is extended till 30 th September 2025 Visit of Batch-4 students under North East Students' Programme for Awareness, Reach, and Knowledge on Space (NE-SPARKS) Programme Visit of Batch-4 students under North East Students' Programme for Awareness, Reach, and Knowledge on Space (NE-SPARKS) Programme Technology Transfer Agreement signed for Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV) Technology Transfer Agreement signed for Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV) ISTRAC inaugurates Golden Jubilee Celebrations: 50 Years of Tracking India's Space Odyssey ISTRAC inaugurates Golden Jubilee Celebrations: 50 Years of Tracking India's Space Odyssey ASI Excellence in Astronautics Awards for the Year 2023-24 Announced ASI Excellence in Astronautics Awards for the Year 2023-24 Announced 52 KB Announcement of Opportunity (AO) for utilizing Chandrayaan-3 Lander and Rover payloads data for scientific analysis Announcement of Opportunity (AO) for utilizing Chandrayaan-3 Lander and Rover payloads data for scientific analysis Foundation Stone Laid for Launch Pad at SSLV Launch Complex (SLC), Kulasekarapattinam Foundation Stone Laid for Launch Pad at SSLV Launch Complex (SLC), Kulasekarapattinam Announcement of Opportunity for UG and PG Science & Technology students to participate in the student session of 23rd National Space Science Symposium (NSSS) 2026 Announcement of Opportunity for UG and PG Science & Technology students to participate in the student session of 23rd National Space Science Symposium (NSSS) 2026 ISRO accomplishes first Integrated Air Drop Test for Gaganyaan Missions successfully ISRO accomplishes first Integrated Air Drop Test for Gaganyaan Missions successfully National Space Day 2025: Celebrating India’s Space Journey from Aryabhatta to Gaganyaan National Space Day 2025: Celebrating India’s Space Journey from Aryabhatta to Gaganyaan Successful static test of KALAM 1200 solid motor at SDSC SHAR, Sriharikota Successful static test of KALAM 1200 solid motor at SDSC SHAR, Sriharikota Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon 2025 - 30 Hours Grand Finale Kicks Off at NRSC Hyderabad Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon 2025 - 30 Hours Grand Finale Kicks Off at NRSC Hyderabad Indian Satellite data based analysis of the Dharali Flash Flood Indian Satellite data based analysis of the Dharali Flash Flood Visit of Batch-2 & 3 students under North East Students' Programme for Awareness, Reach, and Knowledge on Space (NE-SPARKS) Programme Visit of Batch-2 & 3 students under North East Students' Programme for Awareness, Reach, and Knowledge on Space (NE-SPARKS) Programme Space on Wheels: Inspiring Jharkhand, Bihar, and Telangana with Space Science Space on Wheels: Inspiring Jharkhand, Bihar, and Telangana with Space Science ISRO organizes Space Analog Mission in Tso Kar Valley, Ladakh ISRO organizes Space Analog Mission in Tso Kar Valley, Ladakh Regional Meet on "Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047" Regional Meet on "Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047" NISAR - NASA ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar Mission NISAR - NASA ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar Mission Decoding the rhythms of a Black Hole: A discovery with AstroSat Decoding the rhythms of a Black Hole: A discovery with AstroSat Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon-2025: Teams selected for Grand Finale Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon-2025: Teams selected for Grand Finale One-Day Regional Meet for Southern States & UTs on “Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047” One-Day Regional Meet for Southern States & UTs on “Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047” Development of Personnel Sphere for Samudrayaan Project Development of Personnel Sphere for Samudrayaan Project ISRO’s GSLV-F16 will launch ISRO-NASA joint satellite, NISAR, on July 30, 2025 ISRO’s GSLV-F16 will launch ISRO-NASA joint satellite, NISAR, on July 30, 2025 ISRO-NASA joint Axiom – 4 mission to International Space Station (ISS): Post splash down activities and Health conditions of Gaganyatri Shubhanshu Shukla ISRO-NASA joint Axiom – 4 mission to International Space Station (ISS): Post splash down activities and Health conditions of Gaganyatri Shubhanshu Shukla Axiom-4 Mission: A saga of ~12 million kilometers and ~282 orbits aboard ISS Axiom-4 Mission: A saga of ~12 million kilometers and ~282 orbits aboard ISS Axiom-4 Mission: Successful Undocking of Crew Dragon Spacecraft with Gaganyatri from ISS Axiom-4 Mission: Successful Undocking of Crew Dragon Spacecraft with Gaganyatri from ISS Axiom-4 Mission: Successful completion of Microgravity experiments Axiom-4 Mission: Successful completion of Microgravity experiments Successful accomplishment of Development of Service Module Propulsion System technology for Gaganyaan Missions Successful accomplishment of Development of Service Module Propulsion System technology for Gaganyaan Missions Progress of Axiom-4 mission and tentative schedule for undocking from ISS to return journey to earth Progress of Axiom-4 mission and tentative schedule for undocking from ISS to return journey to earth IN-SPACe announces registration for the Short Term Course on Essentials of Space Technology in Agriculture Sector from July 27 - August 01, 2025 IN-SPACe announces registration for the Short Term Course on Essentials of Space Technology in Agriculture Sector from July 27 - August 01, 2025 Public Clarification on Misattributed Media Statements Public Clarification on Misattributed Media Statements North Eastern Regional Meet on “Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047” North Eastern Regional Meet on “Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047” State Meet 2025 for Uttarakhand on “Leveraging Space Technology for Viksit Bharat 2047” State Meet 2025 for Uttarakhand on “Leveraging Space Technology for Viksit Bharat 2047” ISRO conducts successful hot tests of Gaganyaan Service Module Propulsion System ISRO conducts successful hot tests of Gaganyaan Service Module Propulsion System ISRO – STC Confluence -2025 at IIT Kharagpur ISRO – STC Confluence -2025 at IIT Kharagpur Gaganyatri Shubhanshu Shukla called Dr V Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO and acknowledged the efforts of the ISRO team in ensuring his safe travel to the ISS Gaganyatri Shubhanshu Shukla called Dr V Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO and acknowledged the efforts of the ISRO team in ensuring his safe travel to the ISS ISRO conducts student interactions with Gaganyatri onboard ISS ISRO conducts student interactions with Gaganyatri onboard ISS Update on Microgravity Research Experiments onboard the International Space Station Update on Microgravity Research Experiments onboard the International Space Station ISRO Announces National Space Science Symposium 2026 (NSSS-2026) ISRO Announces National Space Science Symposium 2026 (NSSS-2026) Successful Launch of Axiom Mission 4 (Ax-04) with Indian Astronaut and Ax-04 Mission Pilot Shubhanshu Shukla Onboard SpaceX's Dragon Crew Module Successful Launch of Axiom Mission 4 (Ax-04) with Indian Astronaut and Ax-04 Mission Pilot Shubhanshu Shukla Onboard SpaceX's Dragon Crew Module Successful Completion of Health-QUEST Programme: Space Technology Aiding Emergency Healthcare Improvement Successful Completion of Health-QUEST Programme: Space Technology Aiding Emergency Healthcare Improvement Launching of Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon-2025 Launching of Bharatiya Antariksh Hackathon-2025 AX-04 Mission Update Press Brief 14th June 2025 AX-04 Mission Update Press Brief 14 th June 2025 AX-04 Mission Update Press Brief 13th June 2025 AX-04 Mission Update Press Brief 13 th June 2025 NRSC ISRO and SVPUAT Sign MOU for Joint Collaboration for Research, Academic Interface and Outreach Activities NRSC ISRO and SVPUAT Sign MOU for Joint Collaboration for Research, Academic Interface and Outreach Activities NRSC/ISRO and IISc Join Hands for Research to Assess CO2 Source / Sinks and Predicting Extreme Rainfall Events NRSC/ISRO and IISc Join Hands for Research to Assess CO2 Source / Sinks and Predicting Extreme Rainfall Events MoU Signed Between NRSC, Hyderabad and NIAS, Bengaluru MoU Signed Between NRSC, Hyderabad and NIAS, Bengaluru Successful third Hot Test of Semi-Cryogenic Engine Power Head Test Article Successful third Hot Test of Semi-Cryogenic Engine Power Head Test Article ISRO Academia Connect Workshop & Inauguration of Space Technology Incubation Centre (STIC) Facility for Central Region and Release of “Research Areas in Space – 2025” ISRO Academia Connect Workshop & Inauguration of Space Technology Incubation Centre (STIC) Facility for Central Region and Release of “Research Areas in Space – 2025” NISAR Awareness Workshop (April 29, 2025) for Indian Non-Governmental Entities (NGEi) Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad NISAR Awareness Workshop (April 29, 2025) for Indian Non-Governmental Entities (NGEi) Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad Indian Space Situational Assessment Report (ISSAR) for 2024 Released Indian Space Situational Assessment Report (ISSAR) for 2024 Released A National Space Science meeting- SAMHITA (SAC Astronomy Microgravity Heliophysics Ionosphere vaarTA) was organized by SAC (ISRO), Ahmedabad A National Space Science meeting- SAMHITA (SAC Astronomy Microgravity Heliophysics Ionosphere vaarTA) was organized by SAC (ISRO), Ahmedabad ISRO and JAXA Gear Up for Joint Chandrayaan-5 / LUPEX Mission in the Technical Interface Meet ISRO and JAXA Gear Up for Joint Chandrayaan-5 / LUPEX Mission in the Technical Interface Meet Solar Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (SUIT) onboard Aditya-L1 Mission Observed Powerful Solar Flare and a First-of-Its-Kind Observation of Rare Plasma Ejection in Ultra-violet Light Solar Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (SUIT) onboard Aditya-L1 Mission Observed Powerful Solar Flare and a First-of-Its-Kind Observation of Rare Plasma Ejection in Ultra-violet Light Updates on Gaganyaan, Space Docking Technology and GLEX2025 Updates on Gaganyaan, Space Docking Technology and GLEX2025 MOSDAC-IN: A dedicated web portal hosting satellite based products for Indian Navy, developed by ISRO’s Space Applications Center MOSDAC-IN: A dedicated web portal hosting satellite based products for Indian Navy, developed by ISRO’s Space Applications Center Primitive mantle material revealed by Chandrayaan-3 APXS volatile measurements in the South Polar Region of the Moon Primitive mantle material revealed by Chandrayaan-3 APXS volatile measurements in the South Polar Region of the Moon Indian Microgravity Research Portfolio in upcoming Axiom-4 Mission Indian Microgravity Research Portfolio in upcoming Axiom-4 Mission ISRO successfully conducted a short duration hot test of Semicryogenic Engine ISRO successfully conducted a short duration hot test of Semicryogenic Engine Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), Department of Space (DoS) and Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, Department of Science & Technology signs Framework Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Space Medicine Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), Department of Space (DoS) and Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, Department of Science & Technology signs Framework Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Space Medicine ISRO takes up the Lead Role of "International Charter Space and Major Disasters" for six months from April 2025 ISRO takes up the Lead Role of "International Charter Space and Major Disasters" for six months from April 2025 Signing of the MoU between NRSC and HYDRAA: EO based Geospatial data support for Disaster management and Water Resource Protection Signing of the MoU between NRSC and HYDRAA: EO based Geospatial data support for Disaster management and Water Resource Protection SPADEX Mission: Successful demonstration of Second Docking and Power Transfer SPADEX Mission: Successful demonstration of Second Docking and Power Transfer Second Selection List for YUVIKA 2025 Second Selection List for YUVIKA 2025 106 KB Wheat Crop Area and Production Estimation in India: A Pilot on Framework Development Wheat Crop Area and Production Estimation in India: A Pilot on Framework Development ISRO Successfully qualifies fourth stage engine of PSLV with Stellite Nozzle Divergent ISRO Successfully qualifies fourth stage engine of PSLV with Stellite Nozzle Divergent ISRO Commissions Advanced Landing Gear Test Facility ISRO Commissions Advanced Landing Gear Test Facility Selection List for YUVIKA 2025 Selection List for YUVIKA 2025 177 KB Atmospheric Re-entry of POEM-4 Atmospheric Re-entry of POEM-4 Ocean Colour Monitor-3(OCM-3) Satellite Imagery and Vegetation Dynamics: Unveiling Global Patterns Ocean Colour Monitor-3(OCM-3) Satellite Imagery and Vegetation Dynamics: Unveiling Global Patterns Leveraging Indian National Satellite System (INSAT) Geostationary Satellite for advanced lightning detection and analysis Leveraging Indian National Satellite System (INSAT) Geostationary Satellite for advanced lightning detection and analysis ISRO's Cartosat-3 image shows damage caused by the Earthquake in Myanmar on 28 Mar 2025 ISRO's Cartosat-3 image shows damage caused by the Earthquake in Myanmar on 28 Mar 2025 ISRO achieves major breakthrough in Semicryogenic Engine development ISRO achieves major breakthrough in Semicryogenic Engine development ISRO successfully completes 1000hrs Life Test of Stationary Plasma Thruster for Spacecraft Electric Propulsion System ISRO successfully completes 1000hrs Life Test of Stationary Plasma Thruster for Spacecraft Electric Propulsion System Visit of Minister of Foreign Affairs, Latvia to Antariksh Bhavan Visit of Minister of Foreign Affairs, Latvia to Antariksh Bhavan ASEAN Food Security Information System (AFSIS) Appreciates ISRO ASEAN Food Security Information System (AFSIS) Appreciates ISRO Italian Ambassador met Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary, DOS Italian Ambassador met Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary, DOS Prediction of Equatorial Plasma Bubble Formation Prediction of Equatorial Plasma Bubble Formation ISRO & SCL develops 32-bit Microprocessors for space applications ISRO & SCL develops 32-bit Microprocessors for space applications ISRO successfully conducted the flight acceptance hot test of CE20 Cryogenic Engine for LVM3-M6 Mission ISRO successfully conducted the flight acceptance hot test of CE20 Cryogenic Engine for LVM3-M6 Mission India Bags the Credit for First-Ever In-Situ Measurement of the Topmost Fluffy Layer of the Moon’s Surface at Southern Higher Latitudes: New Insight about Harbouring Water-ice on the Moon India Bags the Credit for First-Ever In-Situ Measurement of the Topmost Fluffy Layer of the Moon’s Surface at Southern Higher Latitudes: New Insight about Harbouring Water-ice on the Moon SPADEX UNDOCKING SUCCESSFUL SPADEX UNDOCKING SUCCESSFUL Commencement of the construction of SSLV Launch Complex at Kulasekarapattinam, Tamil Nadu Commencement of the construction of SSLV Launch Complex at Kulasekarapattinam, Tamil Nadu POEM Completed 1000 Orbits in Space POEM Completed 1000 Orbits in Space Chandrayaan-2 unveils the effect of the Earth’s geomagnetic tail on the Lunar ionosphere plasma Chandrayaan-2 unveils the effect of the Earth’s geomagnetic tail on the Lunar ionosphere plasma Historic First: India’s Solar Ultra-violet Imaging Telescope (SUIT) onboard Aditya-L1 Captures Unprecedented Solar Flare Details Historic First: India’s Solar Ultra-violet Imaging Telescope (SUIT) onboard Aditya-L1 Captures Unprecedented Solar Flare Details Release of the Second Set of Aditya-L1 Science Data Release of the Second Set of Aditya-L1 Science Data PRL Scientists Discovered a Dense Sub-Saturn Using PARAS-2 Spectrograph at Mt Abu Telescope PRL Scientists Discovered a Dense Sub-Saturn Using PARAS-2 Spectrograph at Mt Abu Telescope The Charge D'Affaires, Embassy of USA to India met Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary, DOS The Charge D'Affaires, Embassy of USA to India met Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary, DOS Russian Ambassador met Chairman, ISRO/Secretary, DOS Russian Ambassador met Chairman, ISRO/Secretary, DOS Preparing for inflight re-ignition – Vacuum ignition trial of Cryogenic engine with Multi-element Igniter conducted successfully Preparing for inflight re-ignition – Vacuum ignition trial of Cryogenic engine with Multi-element Igniter conducted successfully ISRO successfully completed docking of two SPADEX satellites (SDX-01 & SDX-02) in the early hours of 16 January, 2025. ISRO successfully completed docking of two SPADEX satellites (SDX-01 & SDX-02) in the early hours of 16 January, 2025. Cabinet approves the establishment of “Third Launch Pad” Cabinet approves the establishment of “Third Launch Pad” Dr. V. Narayanan Assumed Charge of Secretary, Department of Space and Chairman, Space Commission Dr. V. Narayanan Assumed Charge of Secretary, Department of Space and Chairman, Space Commission Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS Inaugurated START-2025 Event Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS Inaugurated START-2025 Event CROPS: A Leap in Space Biological Experiments CROPS: A Leap in Space Biological Experiments ISRO Organises National Meet on Aditya L1 Data Release and Payload Performance Appraisal ISRO Organises National Meet on Aditya L1 Data Release and Payload Performance Appraisal PSLV C60/SPADEX Mission : SpaDeX Deployed! Successful separation of SpaDeX satellites marks another milestone in India's space journey PSLV C60/SPADEX Mission : SpaDeX Deployed! Successful separation of SpaDeX satellites marks another milestone in India's space journey SpaDeX: India's Pioneering Space Docking Demonstrator for Future Space Exploration SpaDeX: India's Pioneering Space Docking Demonstrator for Future Space Exploration Gaganyaan-G1 Launch campaign commences: Human Rated LVM3 assembly starts at SDSC for the first un-crewed flight Gaganyaan-G1 Launch campaign commences: Human Rated LVM3 assembly starts at SDSC for the first un-crewed flight Unlocking the Mysteries of the Sun: Aditya-L1's Observations of a Coronal Mass Ejection Unlocking the Mysteries of the Sun: Aditya-L1's Observations of a Coronal Mass Ejection The PSLV-C59/PROBA-3 Mission has successfully achieved its launch objectives, deploying ESA’s satellites into their designated orbit with precision. The PSLV-C59/PROBA-3 Mission has successfully achieved its launch objectives, deploying ESA’s satellites into their designated orbit with precision. Highlights Previous Next ISRO Portals I-Grasp ISRO's Grant In Aid Space Research Programmes ISRO STEM ISRO Science Technology Engineering & Mathematics Programme SPARK ISRO Virtual Space Museum MOSDAC Meteorological & Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre ISSDC Indian Space Science Data Center Bhoonidhi Earth Observation Data Hub Bhuvan Indian Geo-Platform of ISRO VEDAS Visualisation of Earth Observation Data and Archival System NDEM National Database for Emergency Management Recent Updates GSLV-F17/EOS-05 MISSION Launched on: September 04, 2026 More on GSLV-F17/EOS-05 MISSION PSLV-C62 / EOS-N1 Mission Launched on: January 12, 2026 More on PSLV-C62 / EOS-N1 Mission LVM3-M6 / BlueBird Block-2 Mission Launched on: December 24, 2025 More on LVM3-M6 / BlueBird Block-2 Mission LVM3-M5/CMS-03 Mission Launched on: November 02, 2025 More on LVM3-M5/CMS-03 Mission Autonomous bodies PRL NARL NESAC IIST ISRO Centres & Units IN-SPACe NSIL IN-SPACe NSIL Useful Links Related Links Government Portal Reports Policies All ISRO Centres INSPACE NSIL Autonomous bodies Archives Antariksh mein Atmanirbharata JanBhagidari National Voter's Service National Government Service CSSTEAP PIB 7th CPC Pension Revision Status e-Saral Hindi Vakyakosh Procurement Live Register Tender Notices E-procurment New Press Release Publications Annual Report ISM Data Sheets Chandrayaan-2 Product documents Monthly Summary of DOS India's Space Policy Website Policy × भारतीय अंतरिक्ष अनुसंधान संगठन Indian Space Research Organisation भाषा चुनें / Choose Language हिंदी स्वागत है English Welcome

Chairman ISRO/ Secretary DOS participated in the International Space Summit at Paris during September 9-10, 2026 Home /Chairman ISRO/ Secretary DOS participated in the International Space Summit at Paris during September 9-10, 2026 September 23, 2026 On the invitation of President French National Space Agency (CNES), Dr V Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary DOS participated in the International Space Summit at Paris during September 9-10, 2026. Director of Liquid Propulsion Systems Center, Director of Space Transportation Program Office, ISRO HQ, and Associate Scientific Secretary, ISRO also joined the delegation. Chairman, ISRO delivered the key note address on the topic “Future of Humans Space Flight in LEO”. His talk set the stage for the panel discussion on the topic “Exploration post International Space Station”. As part of this, Chairman ISRO visited ESA HQ at Paris on September 10, 2026 and had a meeting with Dr Josef Aschbacher, DG, ESA. During this, both leaders signed and exchanged letters for amending the existing ISRO – ESA cooperative agreement to include new cooperation areas (human and robotic exploration, space weather and sustainability of space activities) and also for extending its validity till 2032. On September 11 th , the delegation visited Toulouse space center of CNES and had a meeting with President CNES. Chairman ISRO also visited the Airbus facility and reviewed the progress in developing the payload for the ISRO-CNES joint satellite mission “TRISHNA”. On September 10 th , Chairman ISRO had a meeting with Mr. Phil Evans, DG, European Organisation for The Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) and exchanged the ISRO – EUMETSAT Implementing Arrangement for scientific cooperation.

ZeeDP 2.0 Space Science Meet held at SAC, Ahmedabad Home / ZeeDP 2.0 Space Science Meet held at SAC, Ahmedabad September 09, 2026 The ZeeDP 2.0 Space Science Meet was conducted jointly by the Science Programme Office (SPO), Directorate of System Reliability and Quality (DSRQ), ISRO Headquarters and Space Applications Centre (SAC) during August 19–20, 2026, at the SAC campus in Ahmedabad. Organized as a proactive step to address the growing involvement of private players and non-ISRO/DOS academic institutions in space missions, the meeting aimed to establish standardized, uniform protocols to ensure "zero-defect" scientific instruments and data products. The two-days meet brought together around 120 scientists and engineers from various ISRO/DOS centres. The meet also witnessed participation from leading academic and research institutions with legacy of developing and contributing to scientific payloads, providing a platform for interaction between the space-science community within ISRO/DOS and the wider scientific community. In the inaugural session, Dr. Deepak Putrevu, Chair, Local Organising Committee welcomed all the participants. Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das, Director, SPO briefed the context for the National meet and Shri Imtiaz Ali Khan, Director, DSRQ provided an overview and implementation aspects of ZeeDP 2.0. On behalf of Director, SAC, the meet was inaugurated by Shri Manish Mehta, Deputy Director, SRQA, SAC. Prof. Anil Bhardwaj, Director, PRL delivered the presidential address and elaborated on the need for ensuring quality and reliability in science payload development life cycle. Smt. S. Megala, DD, SPO presented vote of thanks. The technical sessions covered best practises followed by Systems Reliability (SR) entities at ISRO/DOS centres, standards adopted during archival and dissemination of data products, experiences and lessons learnt from AstroSat, Aditya-L1, XPosat, Chandrayaan-1, 2, 3 and Mars Orbiter Mission. The deliberations provided an opportunity to share practical experiences during the payload life cycle i.e from design to in-orbit operations, ideas to improve the quality of payloads and the need for consistency in adopting best practises. This national-level meet marked an important step towards strengthening the processes associated with science payload development and science data product generation, while facilitating greater interaction and knowledge sharing among ISRO/DOS centres and academic institutions. The outcomes of the meet are expected to contribute towards establishing robust and standardised practices for future space science missions and enhancing the scientific value of the data generated by them. Group photograph of participants of the ZeeDP 2.0 Space Science Meet held at SAC, Ahmedabad.

3 rd National Space Day 2026 celebrated at Ahmedabad Home /3 rd National Space Day 2026 celebrated at Ahmedabad August 24, 2026 The inaugural event of 3 rd National Space Day (NSPD) 2026 was held at Ahmedabad on August 23, 2026. This year’s theme is “Towards Viksit Bharat: Innovating, Collaborating and Aspiring to Global Space Leadership”. Hon’ble Union Minister Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, Union Minister of Culture and Tourism, was the chief guest and Hon’ble Shri Arjunbhai Devabhai Modhwadia, Minister for Forests and Environment, Climate Change and Science and Technology Govt. of Gujarat was the Guest of Honour. Dr V. Narayanan, Secretary DoS / Chairman ISRO presided over the function, Dr Pawan Kumar Goenka, Chairman IN-SPACe and Dr Ch V. N. Rao, Director SAC, participated in the function. The event was inaugurated with invocation, lighting of lamp and formal welcome address by Director SAC. Hon’ble Union Minister Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat while addressing emphasised about the theme reflecting three key pillars of India’s development journey—innovation as the strength of a new India, collaboration as an expression of India’s culture, thought and wisdom, and global leadership as a national aspiration, and stated that the center of these aspirations is India’s youth. He conveyed the important message to the gathering that the success of space missions would be determined by how these missions have changed the lives of common man and further reasserted that space reform is not the privatisation but it is the democratisation of space opportunity. He concluded by stating that India stands at the threshold of immense possibilities and is moving forward with enthusiasm and resolve under the leadership of the Hon’ble Prime Minister. Emphasizing that every stakeholder has a role and responsibility in a period of transformation, he noted that greater capacity and capabilities bring greater responsibility, particularly for those working in the fields of science and space. He called upon all stakeholders to recognize this responsibility and fulfil their respective roles in developing India, so that future generations can take pride in the contribution of the present generation towards Viksit Bharat. He urged everyone to make full use of this opportunity and work with collective resolve for the country’s development. In his address, Guest of Honor Shri Arjunbhai Devabhai Modhwadia mentioned that today’s youth is not job seekers but they are job givers. He invited start-up and industries to establish their manufacturing facilities at Gujarat Space Park. The Secretary, Department of Space / Chairman, ISRO, highlighted that, in recognition of the historic soft landing of Chandrayaan-3’s Vikram lander near the lunar south polar region on August 23, 2023, Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi declared August 23 as ‘National Space Day’. To celebrate this landmark achievement in India’s space journey the 3 rd National Space Day was celebrated on 23 August 2026, in Ahmedabad, which was aptly chosen considering the presence of Space Applications Centre and start-up ecosystem growing rapidly in and around Ahmedabad. He recalled ISRO’s humble beginnings in the 1960s, from launching small sounding rockets to demonstrating the capability to launch international commercial satellites in the 6-ton class. He congratulated M/s Skyroot Aerospace team for successful launch of the first orbital flight ‘Vikram-1’ in the very first attempt. He also mentioned that ISRO team whole heartedly supported the private launch activities as ISRO’s own activity. He added that space sector reforms were rolled out by Govt. of India in 2020, and now it has resulted in growth of more than 440 space start-ups in the country. He reaffirmed that we would contribute towards Viksit Bharat 2047 as per the vision of the Hon’ble Prime Minister. Addressing the gathering, Dr. Pawan Kumar Goenka, Chairman, IN-SPACe, underscored the pivotal role of ISRO in nurturing India's rapidly expanding space ecosystem. He highlighted that the country's growing space industry has been built on ISRO's decades of technological excellence, institutional support, and knowledge-sharing. Emphasising the strength of public-private collaboration, he said that the growth of private space sector in India can happen only with the support of ISRO, and the partnership between ISRO and industry will accelerate innovation, strengthen India's global competitiveness, and help achieve the nation's ambitious space goals. He reiterated that ‘without ISRO there is no space industry in India’. Subsequently, M/s Skyroot Aerospace team was felicitated by Secretary, DOS / Chairman ISRO. Awards to winners of various competitions and quiz organized during national space day celebration across India were also distributed.

ISRO tests an improved version of the first stage of Small Satellite Launch vehicle (SSLV) Home /ISRO tests an improved version of the first stage of Small Satellite Launch vehicle (SSLV) August 12, 2026 ISRO has successfully conducted the ground static test of an improved version of the solid booster stage (SS1) of Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV). The test was conducted on August 11, 2026 at the static test facility located at the Satish Dhawan Space Centre, Sriharikota. The design improvements include enhanced propellant burn rate in two motor segments, optimized thermal protection system and process improvements in the nozzle sub-system to make it more production friendly along with a reduction in the mass. The performance of the solid motor during the test was monitored through extensive instrumentation that measured more than 600 parameters to capture the ignition, ballistics, structural, thermal, dynamics and acoustic performances of the motor. The performance of the motor based on test data was close to the predicted performance. This static test qualifies the design improvements implemented in the first stage of SSLV (SS1). The payload capability of SSLV is estimated to be enhanced by about 100kg to Low Earth Orbit on the induction of this improved version of SS1. The Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV) was developed by ISRO as a production friendly, quick turn-around, launch-on-demand launcher and has completed two successful development flights. The Transfer of Technology to Indian industry is already underway and is expected to be manufactured in large numbers to provide small satellite launch services to customers.

India – U.S. Civil Space Joint Working Group meeting at ISRO Headquarters, Bengaluru Home / India – U.S. Civil Space Joint Working Group meeting at ISRO Headquarters, Bengaluru August 12, 2026 The 9 th meeting of the India-U.S. Civil Space Joint Working Group (CSJWG) was hosted by India on 5-6 August 2026 at the headquarters of the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) in Bengaluru. Dr. V. Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary, Department of Space and H.E. Sergio Gor, the U.S. Ambassador to India addressed the opening segment and highlighted the significance of further strengthening the bilateral space cooperation. The meeting was co-chaired on the Indian side by Mr. M. Sankaran, Director, UR Rao Satellite Centre, ISRO and on the U.S. side by Dr. Wesley Brooks, Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs and Ms. Kathleen Karika, NASA Associate Administrator for International and Interagency Relations. The meeting advanced civil and commercial space cooperation under the U.S.-India Transforming the Relationship Utilizing Strategic Technology (TRUST) Initiative, in line with the February 2025 Joint Leaders’ Statement issued by Prime Minister Modi and President Trump. Both sides discussed expanding cooperation following the successful launch of the joint NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) mission last year, as well as pursuing future science and human space flight technology collaborations. They reaffirmed their commitment to advancing the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) guidelines on the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, as well as reviewed ongoing multilateral efforts for ensuring the Committee’s effectiveness. NASA invited ISRO to join its Moon Base programme, building on the two countries’ partnership under the Artemis Accords. The two sides also agreed to advance discussions for cooperation on open scientific data sharing under the Accords.

ISRO Conducts START Capacity Building Workshop-2026 at IIRS, Dehradun Home / ISRO Conducts START Capacity Building Workshop-2026 at IIRS, Dehradun July 29, 2026 Inaugural session of the ISRO-START Capacity Building Workshop - 2026 on July 27, 2026 During July 27 to July 31, 2026, ISRO is conducting the concluding session of the ISRO-START-2026 programme, through the newly conceived ISRO-START Capacity Building Workshop at IIRS, Dehradun, benefiting 50 students, which include 12 research fellows from IIRS, Dehradun. Among them, 38 students, from the undergraduate and post-graduate levels, have been selected from the toppers of the ISRO-START-2026 online examination, through a stringent set of criteria, representing multiple states of India. The event was inaugurated by Shri. A S Kiran Kumar, Member, Space Commission and former Secretary, DOS / Chairman, ISRO, in the presence of Dr. R.P. Singh, Director of IIRS, Dehradun, Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das, Director, Science Programme Office, ISRO Headquarters, Dr. Harish Karnatak, Head, GIT-DL, IIRS, and the senior faculty members of IIRS. Left: Experiments on Infra-Red Remote Sensing; Right: Hands-on session on Land Surface Temperature analysis using satellite data The ISRO-START Capacity Building Workshop-2026 comprises several components like advanced lectures on space science & applications, interactions with senior scientists of ISRO / Department of Space, physical demonstration of scientific concepts (IR remote sensing, Raman Spectroscopy, etc.), hands-on exercise on satellite data analysis, as well as project work. The students, hailing from different states of the country, are made to team up, and deliver the project-deliverable. This rigorous engagement enhanced the awareness of the students about the space-based techniques, and may initiate some of them to pursue their career in the domains of space science and technology. ISRO has been conducting the START programme since year 2023, each year presenting a unique theme in the realm of space science and technology, with around 20 to 25 specially curated lectures delivered by the pan-India experts, targeting the undergraduate and post-graduate students in science, technology and engineering. A programmatic connection has also been established between ISRO-START and ISRO's biennial scientific meet ‘National Space Science Symposium’, where selected students among the toppers of the START examination attend a specially curated students’ session for closer mentoring and idea exchange. The START-2023 lectures, on the theme of ‘Overview of Space Science and Technology’, have been included as a credit course by the AICTE. The theme of START-2026, conducted during March 11 to April 2, 2026, has been ‘Scientific Observations from Space’ which was inaugurated by Secretary, DOS / Chairman, ISRO on March 11, 2026. The START programme, so far, has cumulatively benefited about 1.6 lacs of students, faculty members, as well as space enthusiasts.

BRICS Heads of Space Agencies 2026 Conclude Meeting in Bengaluru, Advancing Discussions on Remote Sensing Satellite Constellation and Space Sustainability Home / BRICS Heads of Space Agencies 2026 Conclude Meeting in Bengaluru, Advancing Discussions on Remote Sensing Satellite Constellation and Space Sustainability June 24, 2026 The BRICS Heads of Space Agencies (HOSA) 2026 meeting in Bengaluru concluded successfully on June 24, 2026, bringing together the heads and senior representatives of the space agencies of the BRICS member countries — Brazil, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran, Russia, South Africa and the United Arab Emirates. The two-day meeting, held during June 23–24, 2026, was hosted by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO)/Department of Space (DoS) with the support of Ministry of External Affairs (MEA). The meeting was attended by the Hon’ble Union Minister of State for Space, Dr Jitendra Singh; Dr V. Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO and Secretary, Department of Space; and Dr Pawan Goenka, Chairman, IN-SPACe. The meeting emphasized international cooperation in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space, highlighting the critical importance of ensuring the long-term sustainability of space activities. During the sessions, the delegations discussed the potential of BRICS cooperation in leveraging space technology to address pressing global challenges, specifically in remote sensing, disaster management and climate change. BRICS Heads of Space Agencies meeting resulted significant progress on structural and operational frameworks of Space cooperation, including amendment to the BRICS Remote Sensing Satellite Constellation Agreement to include new BRICS members. In addition, Terms of Reference for the proposed BRICS Space Council were discussed in detail, marking a continued commitment to strengthening institutional collaboration among the member nations. Complementing the BRICS Space cooperation, IN-SPACe released an Indian Space Industry Brochure and showcased India’s expanding private space ecosystem by facilitating presentations from space start-ups and industries. The event also included delegation visits to the facilities of private industries, providing first-hand experience to India’s advanced space capabilities. For more information on BRICS and BRICS India 2026, visit https://www.brics2026.gov.in/

BRICS Heads of Space Agencies to gather in India to Strengthen Space Cooperation Home / BRICS Heads of Space Agencies to gather in India to Strengthen Space Cooperation June 22, 2026 India, as Chair of BRICS for 2026, will host the meeting of the BRICS Heads of Space Agencies (HOSA) 2026 at Bengaluru, India during June 23-24, bringing together the heads and senior representatives of the space agencies of the eleven BRICS member countries - Brazil, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa and the United Arab Emirates. The meeting is held under India's overall BRICS chairship theme, of “Building for Resilience, Innovation, Cooperation and Sustainability,” and reflects India's “people-centric”, “humanity-first” approach articulated by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, at BRICS Summit-2025, Rio-de-Janeiro, Brazil. The meeting will serve as an important platform for dialogue and cooperation among BRICS nations on key issues shaping the future of the global space sector. Space sustainability will be a major focus area, with member agencies expected to exchange views on sustainable space operations and domestic governance frameworks to support debris-free space missions. Discussions will focus on policy approaches, regulatory frameworks and best practices to ensure the long-term sustainability of space activities. Member agencies will also deliberate on proposed amendments to the BRICS Remote Sensing Satellite Constellation (RSSC) Agreement to include new Members and discuss the Terms of Reference for the proposed BRICS Space Council. The two-day meeting is being hosted by Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO)/ Department of Space (DOS) with support of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA). Indian space-tech companies will also have a platform at the event, with IN-SPACe facilitating presentations that offer delegates insights into the breadth of capabilities being developed across launch services, satellite technologies, geospatial intelligence and downstream applications. To provide first-hand exposure to India's growing space ecosystem, an industry visit to the facilities of private space enterprises has also been arranged. Dr. Jitendra Singh, Hon’ble Union Minister of State in the Department of Space, will grace the valedictory function of this event and interact with the Heads of BRICS space agencies. About ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) is the space agency of India. The organisation is involved in science, engineering and technology to harvest the benefits of outer space for India and the mankind. ISRO is a major constituent of the Department of Space (DOS), Government of India. The department executes the Indian Space Programme primarily through various Centres or units within ISRO. For more information on BRICS and BRICS India 2026, visit: https://www.brics2026.gov.in

ISRO and IIG Jointly Launch Space Weather Summer School 2026 to Nurture Future Space Scientists Home / ISRO and IIG Jointly Launch Space Weather Summer School 2026 to Nurture Future Space Scientists June 15, 2026 ISRO and the Indian Institute of Geomagnetism (IIG), Panvel, Navi Mumbai are jointly organising a space weather summer school of two-week duration at IIG. The summer school was inaugurated on June 8, 2026 at IIG, Mumbai and is planned up to June 19, 2026. The program focuses on the various aspects of space weather as well as solar-terrestrial physics to introduce the students about the scientific foundations, and practical application of this important emerging field. The inaugural session of the program began with the welcome address by Prof. A. P. Dimri, Director, IIG, who highlighted the significance of this joint initiative between ISRO and IIG. Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das, Director of the Space Science Programme Office at ISRO Headquarters, provided a brief overview of the joint activities being undertaken with IIG under the ISRO-IIG Memorandum of Understanding. Delivering the inaugural address as Chief Guest, Shri M. Ganesh Pillai, Scientific Secretary, ISRO, emphasized the importance of space weather monitoring and capacity building in this domain for India's growing space infrastructure. He indicated that, with society's increasing dependence on space-based technologies, understanding the dynamic space environment, which is driven by solar activity, has become a priority. Various phenomena related to space weather can directly affect satellite operations, power grids, communication and navigation networks. He noted that the summer school will help to address the growing national requirements for skilled human resources in the space weather domain. During the two weeks of the program, the students will be exposed to a comprehensive curriculum that will cover the Sun, heliosphere, magnetosphere, ionosphere-thermosphere interactions, planetary space weather as well as the requirements of various types of measurements, now casting and forecasting requirements. The program is planned to facilitate understanding of students about space weather and associated monitoring requirements for our society. A series of lectures by eminent scientists and faculty members from ISRO, IIG and from other national academia are planned along with hands-on data training to students. Out of around 50 participants from different parts of the country, about 64 percent of the participants are female. In line with the broader efforts to make the country self-reliant in space weather programmes, this summer school represents a significant national-level collaborative initiative to create and enable human resources in the domain of space weather. Participants of IIG-ISRO Space Weather Summer School

International Planetary Data Alliance (IPDA) 2026 Concludes Successful Workshop & Steering Committee meeting at ISTRAC-ISRO Home / International Planetary Data Alliance (IPDA) 2026 June 04, 2026 The International Planetary Data Alliance (IPDA) successfully concluded its 2026 annual events, hosted in ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network (ISTRAC), ISRO in Bengaluru, India. The intensive five-day gathering brought together leading planetary scientists, data engineers, and space agency representatives from across the globe to advance international standards for planetary data archival, long-term preservation, and seamless inter-agency scientific interoperability. International Planetary Data Alliance (IPDA), founded in 2006, is a premier global collaboration of space agencies and planetary data organizations. Its core mission is to establish and promote unified standards, protocols, and best practices among planetary data archives worldwide, ensuring that valuable scientific data from deep-space missions remains accessible and usable for the global scientific community over the long term. The IPDA-2026 kicked off with a three-day technical workshop and demonstrations from May 18–20, 2026, followed by the IPDA Steering Committee meeting from May 21–22, 2026, jointly organised by Indian Space Science Data Center -ISTRAC, Signal & Image Processing Area- SAC & Science Programme Office, ISRO-HQ. The workshop was inaugurated by the Chief Guest, Shri A S Kiran Kumar, Member, Space Commission & Chairman, Apex Science Board in the presence of Directors – URSC, ISTRAC LEOS and Programme Offices of ISRO HQ. The workshop was organised in 5 technical sessions which was delivered by experts and researchers engaged in deep-dive tutorials on fundamental planetary data infrastructures from various space organisations like ESA, NASA, Europlanet, JAXA, AstroMat, ISRO/DOS, CNES etc. Around 120 participants across the country participated in this workshop. The workshop also saw robust participation from Chandrayaan-4, Chandrayaan-5, and the Venus Orbiter Mission payload teams. Significantly, the workshop introduced specialized tracks dedicated to data archival frameworks for sample return missions—a rapidly evolving domain requiring rigorous global standardization. Training was also conducted on the Table Access Protocol (TAP), an ongoing IPDA initiative aimed at breaking down data silos by standardizing access across three major domains: planetary, solar, and astronomy sciences. The annual Steering Committee meeting, which was conducted during the last two days, served as the core event, bringing together major space organizations alongside the host agency, ISRO. Delegates from each participating agency presented comprehensive progress reports on their planetary data management achievements over the past year. The committee engaged in highly productive discussions addressing contemporary technical and operational challenges faced by space agencies, sharing critical lessons learned, and evaluating how emerging technologies can be leveraged to modernize global planetary data systems. By hosting this prestigious annual event, ISRO reinforces its commitment to open science and international collaboration, ensuring that the wealth of data generated by current and future deep-space exploration missions is preserved to the highest global standards for generations to come. IPDA 2026 workshop participants

ISRO and TIFR Sign MoU for Collaboration in Space Science and Related Technologies Home / ISRO and TIFR Sign MoU for Collaboration in Space Science and Related Technologies April 20, 2026 In a landmark event for India’s space exploration programme, on April 20, 2026, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), Department of Space (DOS), signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), for scientific collaboration in the domain of space science, technology, and exploration. The signing ceremony took place at ISRO Headquarters, Bengaluru, and was presided over by Dr. Narayanan V., Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS. The MoU was signed by Shri M. Ganesh Pillai, Scientific Secretary, ISRO, and Prof. Jayaram Chengalur, Director, TIFR. Witnesses included Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das, Director, Science Programme Office (SPO), and Dr. Girish V., Deputy Director, SPO, ISRO Headquarters, Prof.Divya Oberoi, TIFR and Dr. Joe Ninan, TIFR. This event marks a historical milestone, as it establishes the formal framework for scientific collaboration between ISRO and TIFR, organizations that have shared an "umbilical" relationship in space sciences for over several decades. While TIFR played a critical role in the formative days of the Indian space programme through early balloon experiments and mission-specific partnerships like AstroSat, this MoU provides a structured multi-year collaboration in ground and space-based scientific exploration of the outer space. Secretary, DOS / Chairman, ISRO, during his presidential address, stated that this MoU bridges a critical gap in the formal framework for science collaboration. He highlighted that India is entering an era where science extends to exoplanetary study and the development of several national capabilities. Collaboration between ISRO and TIFR would facilitate the materialisation of the nation’s target to achieve excellence in space science in the global arena. Scientific Secretary, ISRO recalled TIFR’s role as the "cradle of Indian space scientists," noting its pivotal contributions to the early day’s of the country’s space programme, which paved the way to TIFR’s contributions to the AstroSat mission. Director, TIFR emphasized that the institute will leverage national space and ground-based technological capabilities to propose projects that translate fundamental scientific knowledge into tangible advancements aligned with national initiatives. This partnership significantly enhances India's might in space exploration by fostering a seamless pipeline between academic excellence and space infrastructure. By co-developing indigenous hardware and joint testing facilities, the MoU reduces dependency on foreign entities. Furthermore, this collaboration ensures that joint activities will place India at the forefront of global fundamental space science.

International Conference on Spacecraft Mission Operations - SMOPS-2026 Home / International Conference on Spacecraft Mission Operations - SMOPS-2026 April 20, 2026 The second edition of the International Conference on “Spacecraft Mission Operations: SMOPS-2026,” themed “Innovative Operations for Smart and Sustainable Space Mission Management - Next Generation,” was held from 8-10 April, 2026 in Bangalore, India. The conference, jointly organised by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), the Astronautical Society of India (ASI) and the International Academy of Astronautics (IAA), aimed to cover a wide range of topics related to mission operations management, advanced mission design, automation, large constellations management, human spaceflight mission, space robotics, space policy, lunar and interplanetary exploration, cybersecurity in space systems, artificial intelligence (AI), present and future trends in ground station operations and so on, while addressing the futuristic techniques in both upstream and downstream segments. An exclusive workshop for students and young professionals was conducted on 10 th April, as part of SMOPS-2026. The conference was inaugurated on 8 th April 2026 by Shri A. S. Kiran Kumar, former Chairman ISRO / Secretary, Department of Space (DOS), in the presence of Dr. V. Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS; Shri M. Sankaran, Director, U R Rao Satellite Centre (URSC); Dr. Jean Michel Contant, Secretary General, IAA; and Dr. A. K. Anil Kumar, Director, ISRO Telemetry Tracking and Command Network (ISTRAC). The key themes featured in this conference, one-of-its-kind in India, included Mission Operations: Turning Design into Achievement Navigating Current Milestones & Future Horizons Mission Design and Operations Mission Operations Strategy and Future Roadmap AI and Robotics Ground Segment and Constellations Human Space Program, Interplanetary Missions and Ground Segment Orbits of Opportunity: Contributing to the New Space Economy Human Space Program Challenges Robotic Mission Operations on ISS Space Domain Awareness: Concepts, Capabilities and Applications Leveraging Space Applications Apart from 120 oral and 88 poster presentations, leading domain experts from European Space Agency (ESA); Centre National d'Études Spatiales (CNES); German Aerospace Center Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR); Institute of Biomedical Problems (IBMP), Russia; Institut Kosmicheskih Issledovanyi (IKI), Russia; National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), USA; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA); CelesTrak; European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT); European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat); Delft University of Technology (TU Delft), Netherlands and institutions from Canada, participated as keynote speakers and panellists. The conference served as a unique networking platform, bringing together space agencies, start-ups, industry and academia to share perspectives on state-of-the-art technologies and to address emerging challenges in a rapidly evolving space landscape. The final day of the conference featured a workshop with invited talks on topics such as robotic mission operations on the International Space Station (ISS), Space Domain awareness, Space Applications, Human Space missionsand astronaut training that witnessed overwhelming participation. During the inaugural address, Chairman ISRO emphasised the critical role of meticulous planning and flawless execution of spacecraft mission operations in ensuring the success of space missions. He reiterated the need for the Indian space sector to proactively engage with global counterparts in finding innovative solutions to the evolving challenges in the space sector. One of the central themes was navigating the ongoing and upcoming challenges, from both technological and policy aspects, of increasing complexity of diversified, distributed mission operational concepts, arising out of disruptive technological innovation, advent of large constellations, exacerbating space traffic congestion, and more ambitious human space explorations beyond the realm of Earth.The pivotal role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML), in enabling more autonomous and efficient mission operations with human-machine synergy were underscored across the sessions. ISTRAC, the hub of spacecraft operations for all Low Earth Orbit and Deep Space missions, from Aryabhata satellite to NISAR, has several landmark achievements to its credit, including the historic Mangalyaan mission, thesoft landing of Chandrayaan-3, insertion of Aditya-L1 spacecraft in Lagrangian Point around Sun and docking experiments in SpaDEx mission, took a leading role in organising SMOPS-2026. In the backdrop of opening up of Indian space sector and ISRO embarking on Human Space mission, SMOPS-2026 served as a rich confluence of ideas across multiple disciplines, fostering collaboration, cooperation, and partnerships amongst the global space community to chart a safe, sustainable and smart roadmap for future space mission operations.

Indian Space Situational Awareness Report (ISSAR) for 2025 Released Home / Indian Space Situational Awareness Report (ISSAR) April 16, 2026 The Indian Space Situational Awareness Report for 2025 (ISSAR-2025) was released by Dr. V. Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO/Secretary, DOS, on the 8 th April, 2026, during the inaugural session of the second international conference on Spacecraft Mission Operations (SMOPS-2026) being held at Bengaluru. An executive summary of ISSAR-2025 is presented below. Background ISRO System for Safe and Sustainable Space Operations Management (IS 4 OM) functions as the nodal entity to concert all space sustainability efforts, including Space Situational Awareness (SSA) activities, to safeguard national space assets against various space environmental hazards and to improve compliance with internationally recognised guidelines on the long-term sustainability of outer space activities. As an integral part of these activities, an annual assessment of the prevailing space situation is compiled in the form of the Indian Space Situational Assessment Report (ISSAR) for dissemination to the relevant stakeholders. The highlights for ISSAR-2025 are as follows. Global Scenario The year 2025 witnessed the highest number of launches since the beginning of the space age. There were 328 launch attempts, out of which 315 launches were successful in placing 4198 known operational satellites. A total of 4651 objects were added to the space object population in this year in a significant rise compared to the previous years- the space object population increased by 2963 objects from 254 launches in 2024 and 3135 objects from 212 launches in 2023.The cumulative growth of space objects till the end of 2025 is shown in Figure 1. Figure 1 Cumulative growth of space objects (data source: Space-Track catalogue, History of On-Orbit Satellite Fragmentations published by NASA) The prominent spikes in space object population, seen in Figure 2, correspond to the Transporter rideshare launches (Transporter 12,13,14, and 15 missions on 14 January, 15 March, 2 June, and 28 November respectively), which typically added more than 70 payloads, the highest being on 28 November with 140 payloads. The spikes with more than 50 objects can be correlated with the simultaneous launches of two batches of Starlink satellites or the launches of Starlink and Kuiper batches coinciding on the same day. Launches of satellites from 3 different constellations also coincided on 28 April 2025, namely, two batches of Starlink satellites (50 objects), one batch of Kuiper (27 objects), and one batch of Huilanwang (10 objects). Soyuz-2.1b launch vehicle also injected 52 payloads on 28 December 2025. Figure 2: Number of catalogued objectslaunched in orbit and re-entered the atmosphere on each day from 1st January to 31st December2025 (data source: Space-Track) A total of 1911 catalogued objects re-entered the atmosphere. The number of atmospheric re-entries is less than the previous year. A higher number of re-entries in 2024 can be attributed to the large-scale de-orbiting of Starlink satellites and more intense solar activity. Among the objects that re-entered in 2025, 1002 objects were known spacecraft, 657 were debris objects, 108 were rocket bodies, and 144 were of unknown nature. Out of the 10749 Starlink satellites, 9396 satellites were still in orbit and 1353 satellites re-entered the Earth’s atmosphere by the end of 2025. In addition, constellations like HulianwangDigui, Kuiper, USA-NRO (National Reconnaissance Office) launched 136, 180, and 99 satellites in 2025, respectively. No major on-orbit break-up events were reported in 2025 (events generating typically more than 20 catalogued fragments are considered as major ones). There were four lunar missions in 2025, reflecting the renewed interest in lunar exploration. All of these missions were launched by private players. Among them, Blue Ghost Mission 1 made history by becoming the first privately owned spacecraft to successfully soft land on the Moon. Notable ground impact events of debris surviving atmospheric re-entries in the reporting period include debris from Falcon-9 second stage which re-entered over Poland on 19 February, Crew-9 Dragon trunk recovered in Chech region, Sahara Desert on 24 March, and multiple Composite Overwrapped Pressure Vessels(COPV) in Santa Fe, Argentina on 10 May. No casualties were reported. KOSMOS 954, a failed Venus probe which came back to Earth and impacted over the Indian Ocean on May 10, 2025, after 53 years of its launch, was also expected to have survived the re-entry. The Shenzhou-20 spacecraft of the Chinese human spaceflight mission to Tiangong space station reportedly suffered a cracked window due to a suspected micrometeoroid impact. The damage was detected on 5 November 2025, which delayed the return of the 3-member crew team, ultimately forcing them to return via another craft on a later date. The consolidated data for 2025 is indicative of intensified space activities, as reflected by the maximum number of launches. The growing trend in the space object population continued. The sheer number of close approach alerts (~1,60,000) indicates the congestion in space, especially low-Earth orbit. The projected deployment of multiple large constellations indicates a scenario where active satellites may outnumber space debris within the current decade, and a consequent increase in the burden of space traffic coordination. The solar activities during the Solar Cycle 25 peak (which started in 2024 end and lasted till early 2025) were high, as indicated by several moderate to severe geomagnetic storms. The effects were reflected in the higher orbital decay rates and a higher number of re-entries at the beginning of the year. Indian Space Scenario by the End of 2025 A synopsis of the space situation of all Indian objects, since the beginning of India’s space journey and as evolved by the end of 2025, is as follows: As of the end of 2025, a total of 144 Indian spacecraft, including those from private operators/academic institutions, have been launched. The number of operational satellites owned by the Government of India was 22 in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) and 31 in Geo-synchronous Earth Orbit (GEO). NVS-02 continued to operate in an elliptic Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit (GTO). In addition, two Indian deep space missions, namely, Chandrayaan-2 Orbiter (CH2O) and Aditya-L1 at the Sun-Earth Lagrange’s point, are also active. One of the notable events in 2025 was the lunar flyby of the Chandrayaan-3 mission’s Propulsion Module (PM), which was placed in a high-altitude Earth orbit in November 2023, away from its original 150 km circular polar orbit. The interplay of gravity fields in deep space led the spacecraft to re-enter the Moon’s Sphere of Influence (SOI) in November 2025, where the Moon's gravitation dominated the motion. Among the intact Indian upper stages, a total of 36 rocket bodies have re-entered the Earth’s atmosphere till 31 December 2025. All LVM3 rocket bodies have decayed except for the rocket bodies of LVM3-M2/OneWeb India1 mission, LVM3-M5/ CMS-03, and LVM3-M6/BB-1 mission. Among GSLV rocket bodies, GSLV-F12, GSLV-F14, GSLV-F15, and GSLV-F16 rocket bodies are in orbit. No SSLV rocket bodies remained in orbit by the end of the year 2025. Space Situation of Indian Objects during 2025 There were five launches from Sriharikota spaceport, namely GSLV-F15/NVS-02, PSLV-C61/EOS-9, GSLV-F16/NISAR, LVM3-M5/CMS-03, and LVM3-M6/Blue bird Block-2 mission. All of them, except PSLV-C61, successfully injected the payloads in their nominally designated orbits. PSLV-C61 suffered a third stage anomaly that resulted in a suborbital flight and could not inject the EOS-9 satellite into its orbit. GSLV-F15 marked the 100th launch of an Indian Launch Vehicle from SDSC-SHAR.NVS-02 satellite launched by GSLV-F15 could not be raised to its designated orbit despite precise injection into GTO due to propulsion system failure. NISAR, a joint NASA-ISRO mission, was successfully launched on 30 July 2025. CMS-03/GSAT-7R was successfully launched and placed in its designated longitude slot. Consequently, a total of 2 Indian satellites, 1 foreign satellite, and 4 rocket bodies were placed in their intended orbits by Indian launchers. In addition, three Firefly satellites, NILA, and LEAP-1 were also launched from the US. As a result, a total of 8 Indian satellites were placed in orbit. # Indian Launch Vehicle Indian Satellites Foreign Payloads ISRO/GOI Private/ Academic 1. Not Applicable - Firefly 1, 2, 3 (by Transporter 12 from Vandenberg Space Force Base, California) - 2. GSLV-F15 / NVS-02 NVS-02 - - 3. Not Applicable - NILA (by Transporter 13 from Vandenberg Space Force Base, California) - 4. GSLV-F16/NISAR NISAR - - 5. Not Applicable - LEAP-1 (Falcon-9 Block 5 from Vandenberg Space Force Base, California) - 6. LVM3 M5/CMS-03 CMS-03 - - 7. LVM3 M6/ BB2B - - Blue Bird Block 2 Collision Avoidance Analysis (COLA) for lift-off clearance of launch vehicles were carried out. # Mission Nominal lift-off time (UTC) Change in nominal lift-off Launch Pad@SHAR 1 GSLV-F15/NVS-02 29-01-2025 00:53:00 - Second 2 PSLV-C61/EOS-09 18-05-2025 00:29:00 - First 3 GSLV-F16/NISAR 30-07-2025 12:10:25 - Second 4 LVM3-M5/CMS-03 02-11-2025 11:56:00 - Second 5 LVM3-M6/ BlueBird Block-2 24-12-2025 03:24:49 Delayed by 41 sec to 03:25:30 UTC Second The lift-off of LVM3 M6 mission was delayed by 41 sec based on COLA recommendation. More than 1,50,000 alerts issued by the Combined Space Operations Center (CSpOC) of USSPACECOM for ISRO’s Earth orbiting satellites were analysed using more accurate orbital data from operational flight dynamics. There were 4 collision avoidance manoeuvres (CAM) for GEO, while 14 CAMs, including one for NISAR, which is designated as Risk Mitigation Maneuver in NASA terminology, were performed for LEO satellites. Wherever feasible, collision avoidance requirements were met by adjusting orbit maintenance manoeuvres to avoid exclusive CAMs. Orbital Regime of Spacecraft No.of CAMs Remarks LEO 14 Requirements for collision avoidance were incorporated in regular orbit manoeuvres wherever it was feasible GEO 4 Total (LEO + GEO) 18 Planetary (Chandrayaan-2) 2 Orbit manoeuvre plan revised on 1 January & 24 July, 2025 for conjunction situation with LRO Figure 3: Cumulative number of CAMs performed since 2011 All manoeuvre plans, including those of the CAMs, were subjected to close approach risk analysis to rule out any potential close approach with other neighbouring space objects within a few days of the manoeuvres; 82 manoeuvre plans were revised to avoid post-manoeuvre close approaches with other space objects for LEO satellites. Similarly, on two occasions, manoeuvre plans had to be revised to avoid post-manoeuvre conjunctions for GEO satellites. Orbital Regime of Spacecraft No. of Orbit Manoeuvres LEO 563 GEO 519 (excluding pulsing manoeuvres) Chandrayaan-2 Orbiter 16 A similar methodology for conjunction assessment and collision risk mitigation was followed for deep-space missions. For the Chandrayaan-2 Orbiter (CH2O), 16 OMs were carried out, and the plans for manoeuvre were adjusted on 2 occasions. The required coordination for spaceflight safety was carried out for all operational satellites. For CH2O, such coordination with Firefly Aerospace, Intuitive Machines, and iSpace during their lunar orbiting phase was facilitated by NASA. At its end-of-mission, the IRNSS-1D satellite was raised to a graveyard orbit nearly 600 km above the geostationary belt and passivated. While relocation of geostationary satellites to super-synchronous orbits at the end of the mission has been a regular practice in ISRO, this is the first-ever disposal of an Indian satellite operating in an inclined geosynchronous orbit. The Cartosat-2A satellite, which was launched in 2008 and successfully completed andfar exceeded its designated mission life of 5 years, became non-operational in 2025. In the reporting year, TES and POEM-4 re-entered Earth’s atmosphere through natural decay. Two more upper stages of the SSLV-D3 mission, namely the Velocity Trimming Module (VTM) and the solid stage (SS3), re-entered the atmosphere. Eight debris originating from the fragmentation of PSLV C3 re-entered the atmosphere in 2025, while 33 still remained in orbit as of 31 December 2025. Hence, the total number of Indian objects that re-entered the atmosphere in 2025 is 12. Another significant milestone in 2025 was the SpaDeX mission, which demonstrated autonomous rendezvous, docking and undocking capabilities. Operations of the relocatable robotic arm and robotic manipulator were also successfully demonstrated on the upper stage of the launch vehicle for this mission, known as the PS4 orbital experimental module/ POEM-4 platform. Such demonstrations mark a significant step towards making bigger strides in long-term sustainability of outer space activities through future endeavours such as mission life extension, active debris removal, and in-space servicing and assembly. 2025 also marked the historic voyage of the Indian astronaut, Group Captain Shubhanshu Shukla, who commanded the private Axiom 4 crewed mission to ISS in Dragon crew module. The mission was launched from Launch Complex 39A at Kennedy Space Centre on June 25, with Dragon spacecraft successfully docking to ISS on June 26, undocking on July 14, and splashing down on July 15. Efforts to Preserve Space Sustainability Efforts were continued to fulfil the objectives of Debris Free Space Mission (DFSM), which was declared in 2024, during the plenary session of the 42nd annual meet of IADC at Bengaluru. DFSM aims for debris-free space missions by all Indian space actors, both governmental and non-governmental, by 2030, by adopting the necessary measures during the design, operation, and disposal phases, such as allocating sufficient fuel to ensure post-mission deorbiting capability of LEO satellites. As part of indigenous SSA capacity building through Network for Space Objects Tracking and Analysis (NETRA) project, the establishment of an optical telescope at Hanle, Ladakh, is underway. Design and review of an indigenous phased array space object tracking radar was completed by a national-level expert committee in 2025. The efforts to establish an indigenously developed radar in the north-eastern part of India are in progress. The Multi-Object Tracking Radar (MOTR) at Sriharikota currently tracks space objects, including the Indian rocket bodies and satellites such as POEM-4, during their last few orbits before atmospheric re-entry, wherever feasible. The Baker Nunn Schmidt Telescope (BNST), currently being refurbished at Nainital, under collaboration with ARIES, is also expected to enhance space object tracking capability in the near future. India actively participates in the deliberations related to space debris in international fora like Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IADC), IAA Space Debris Committee, International Astronautical Federation (IAF) STM Committee, ISO working group 7, and the UN working group on long-term sustainability to provide relevant inputs. In synergy with the Indian National Space Promotion and Authorisation Centre (IN-SPACe), ISRO engages with private actors for handholding and experience sharing for best practices related to spaceflight safety. As part of an unwavering commitment to the preservation of the sustainability of outer space activities, ISRO will continue to proactively implement space debris mitigation measures to achieve the goals of DFSM and collaborate with relevant stakeholders at the national and international level.

Secretary, DOS/ Chairman, ISRO Inaugurated START-2026 Event Home / Secretary, DOS/ Chairman, ISRO Inaugurated START-2026 Event March 12, 2026 On March 11, 2026, Dr. V Narayanan, Secretary, DOS/ Chairman, ISRO, inaugurated the fourth edition of ISRO’s introductory-level online awareness programme, Space science and Technology AwaReness Training (START-2026). The 2026 edition of START focuses on the theme "Observation from Space," utilizing orbital platforms to study Earth, the solar system, and beyond.The course features 26 lectures, to be delivered by pan-India experts, including scientists and engineers from ISRO/DOS. The lectures will be concluded on April 2, 2026, following which there will be an online examination for the participants registered with the nodal centres. The current edition involves a few hundreds of academic institutes acting as nodal centres across India, where students participate in group-learning and are eligible for merit certificates based on their performance in the upcoming final online examination, after the completion of START-2026. During the inaugural address, Dr. V Narayanan, Secretary, DOS/ Chairman, ISROemphasized on the importance of motivating the student community to join the nation-building activities through India’s space exploration programme. He mentioned about the global trend in space exploration, and how India is going to excel, working with the international partners as a resourceful global contributor. In that direction, he emphasized on excelling in the academic domain, as well as to nurture cross-disciplinary awareness. He further emphasized that many of the student participants will be the leaders to take forward country’s space exploration journey. Shri A S Kiran Kumar spoke about the success of the START programme since its inception in year 2023. Since its first edition, the START programme has benefited over 1.2 lacs of students, faculty members and space enthusiasts all over the country. He also spoke about how a mechanism is established to identify the meritorious students from START and facilitate their further exposure to space sciences through ISRO’s biennial National Space Science Symposium. He further elaborated on how a group of students from the previous editions of START were provided opportunities to present their ideas and work in a specially curated student session in NSSS-2026, which was organized at NESAC, Umiam, Meghalaya.Scientific Secretary, ISRO, Shri M. Ganesh Pillai spoke on the consistent improvement of this programme, and how each edition is benefiting the student community. He further mentioned that this effort is in orientation with the National Education Policy where the holistic perspective of knowledge is encouraged. Dr. Raghavendra Pratap Singh, Director, IIRS, ISRO, mentioned that, gathering experience and feedback from the previous editions, this edition of START will witness several enhancements in terms of student-benefit. The START programme is recognized as a strategic initiative to attract post-graduate and final-year undergraduate students of physical sciences and technology to the space sector. By providing a holistic overview of the cross-disciplinary nature of space activities, ISRO aims to foster "system-level thinking" among the youth. This effort aligns with the "Amrut Kaal" vision for 2047, systematically building the human resources required to lead major national goals, such as the Indian Space Station and crewed lunar landings. The inaugural ceremony was attended from ISRO Headquarters by Dr. V Narayanan, Secretary, DOS/ Chairman, ISRO, Shri A S Kiran Kumar, former Secretary, DOS/ Chairman, ISRO, member, space commission, chair, Apex Science Board of ISRO, Shri M Ganesh Pillai, Scientific Secretary, ISRO, Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das, Director, Space Science Programme, ISRO Headquarters, and Dr. Praveen Kumar K, Deputy Director, Science Programme Office, ISRO Headquarters, while Dr. Raghavendra Pratap Singh, Director, IIRS, ISRO attended from IIRS, Dehradun. The online event was also attended by the Directors of ISRO/DOS centres/units/autonomous bodies, the scientists/engineers from ISRO/DOS, as well as Pan-India academicians, researchers, students, and space enthusiasts through ISRO’s official social media platform. Following the inaugural ceremony, the course commenced with thecontext lecture titled "What, Why and How do we Observe from Space," delivered by Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das, Director of the Science Programme Office, ISRO HQ. The inaugural event and the START-2026 context lecture can be attended through the following link: https://www.youtube.com/live/vxusHltqyd8 Left: Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS inaugurating the START-2026 event online, from ISRO Headquarters; Right: Director, IIRS delivering the welcome address from IIRS, Dehradun

Inauguration of ISRO's Space Science and Technology Awareness Training (START 2026) programme on 11 th March 2026 Home / Inauguration of ISRO's Space Science and Technology Awareness Training programme March 07, 2026 ISRO’s fourth edition of Space Science and Technology Awareness Training (START 2026) programme will be inaugurated by Dr.V.Narayanan, Chairman ISRO / Secretary DoS on 11 th March 2026 at 15:00 hrs. Live streaming of inaugural session is available at https://youtube.com/live/vxusHltqyd8 Duration of training: 11 th March 2026 - 02 nd April 2026. Timing: On inaugural day 11 th March 15:00-16:30 hrs; Other days 15:15 - 16:45 hrs For participant registration visit: https://elearning.iirs.gov.in/edusatregistration/

ISRO Conducted the 23 rd National Space Science Symposium (NSSS-2026) at NESAC, Umiam, Meghalaya Home / NSSS-2026 March 02, 2026 Inaugural session of NSSS-2026 on February 23, 2026, at NESAC, Umiam, Meghalaya. Shri A S Kiran Kumar, former Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS, member Space Commission, has been the chief guest of the event. In the left side, Dr. V Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS is seen addressing in the event online from the ISRO Headquarters, Bengaluru. The 23 rd edition of the National Space Science Symposium (NSSS-2026), the premier biennial scientific flagship programme of the ISRO was conducted during February 23 to 27, 2026, at the North Eastern Space Applications Centre (NESAC), Umiam, Meghalaya. The symposium serves as India's one of the foremost national platform for scientific interaction, bringing together researchers, academicians, and professionals in the fields of atmospheric, space, and planetary sciences, as well as astronomy and astrophysics. On February 23, 2026, the inaugural ceremony of NSSS-2026 was graced by Shri A. S. Kiran Kumar, former Chairman ISRO/ Secretary DoS, member, Space Commission, and Chair of the National Organising Committee (NOC), as the chief guest. Dr. V. Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DoS attended the inaugural event online. The inauguration featured the formal release of the NSSS-2026 abstract volume with the subsequent inauguration of the space exhibition. During his inaugural address, Shri A S Kiran Kumar expressed pride in hosting this national milestone at NESAC, emphasizing its role in strengthening center-state cooperation and capacity building for the North-Eastern Region (NER). Chairman ISRO, Dr. V. Narayanan, noted that NSSS-2026 provides a critical bridge for sharing results from flagship missions like Aditya-L1, XPoSat, and the Chandrayaan series, while acting as a catalyst for India’s Space Vision 2047. Shri M Ganesh Pillai, Scientific Secretary, ISRO stated that this symposium is expected to reflect on the capabilities, as well as the gap areas in space science and the enabling technologies, and chalk out plans to bridge them. Prof. Dipankar Banerjee, Vice Chancellor, IIST, Thiruvananthapuram elaborated on the scientific programme of the event and emphasized on the importance of cross-disciplinary interactions. Dr. TirthaPratim Das, Director of the Space Science Programme, ISRO Headquarters, took the audience down memory lane by recalling the genesis of the NSSS, and its evolution, especially the value editions since the 2022 edition of the symposium. Release of the NSSS-2026 abstract book by Shri A S Kiran Kumar Reflecting on the genesis and evolution of the symposium, it was recalled that the symposium has traveled a remarkable path since its maiden edition in 1978 at Andhra University, Visakhapatnam. Evolving from the Indian Rocket Society symposium, it was initially known as the INCOSPAR symposium and was strategically timed to precede international COSPAR meetings to vet papers for the global stage. Over the decades, its scope broadened to encompassing research "from the surface to the deep space," integrating both ground-based and space-borne studies. NSSS-2026 introduced several transformative enhancements. An intensive year-long Regional Outreach Programme (ROP) was conducted by NESAC across nine locations in all eight North-Eastern states, reaching out to 867 students. Through the ROP, the oranisers identified and awarded meritorious students (undergraduate and post-graduate levels) and enthusiastic teachers from the North Eastern region, and about 30 meritorious students were selected for participating in the NSSS-2026. The organisers also identified 50 meritorious undergraduate and post-graduate students from the other parts of the country, through different mechanisms, as well as the students who topped in the ISRO START-2024 and START-2025 awareness training programme events. In total, 80 undergraduate and post-graduate students from different parts of the country were sponsored to attend the special students’ session. This edition of the symposium also marked a major move to break academic silos by strategically integrating start-ups and private industry into its technical sessions and exhibitions, fostering a robust national innovation pipeline. The NSSS-2026 technical program encompassed a multidisciplinary confluence of research exploring the universe from the surface to deep space. Breaking the record of all the previous editions of the symposium, a total of 817papers were presented in NSSS-2026. These papers were distributed across six parallel sessions covering the domains of meteorology & climate change, middle atmosphere and aeronomy, solar and planetary sciences, astronomy & astrophysics, enabling technologies; as well as a dedicated student session, comprising the above-mentioned 80 undergraduate and post-graduate level students from various academic institutions of the country. Each of the parallel sessions organised specialized breakout sessions for domain-specific discussions to bring out the gap areas and novel concepts. To encourage young researchers, the schedule featured a large number of short oral and poster presentations across these domains. Interaction sessions were arranged between senior scientists of ISRO and the students, including special interaction sessions with Shri A S Kiran Kumar, former Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS,Gaganyatri Group Captain Shubhanshu Shukla. There were advanced lectures offered by the senior scientists from ISRO to the students on several facets of space science and technology to channelize their concepts and ideas. Throughout the five days of the event, the students were mentored closely by senior scientists from ISRO/DOS. The ROP also encouraged the students to utilize India’s space science mission data, as a result, several of them have used the data from India’s space science missions to arrive at scientific results, which were presented during the symposium. The symposium also witnessed the footfall of about 300 school students from six local academic institutions who visited the space exhibition. Another set of 50 students from the local schoolsgot opportunity to interact with Gaganyatri Group Captain Shubhanshu Shukla. The five-days event of NSSS-2026 concluded with its valedictory session on February 27, 2026, with a note of new concepts, ideas, and self-assessment, creation of an inspired pool of students, which would contribute to the enrichment of the country’s space exploration programme, and aid in fulfilling India’s SpaceVision2047.

NVS-02 Spacecraft: On-Orbit Observations and Apex Committee Recommendations Home / NVS-02 Spacecraft: On-Orbit Observations and Apex Committee Recommendations February 25, 2026 NVS-02, the second spacecraft in the NVS series, was injected successfully into the elliptical transfer orbit of 170 x 37785 km with 20.8 o inclination on January 29, 2025 at 00:53 UT. The Spacecraft was separated from the Launch vehicle (GSLVF15) at 01:12:08 UT.On separation of the satellite from the launch vehicle, a series of autonomous activities on the satellite were carried out including the solar panel deployment and stabilizing the orientation for power generation. However, the orbit raising operations from the elliptical to circular orbit could not be carried out. An Apex Committee was constituted to review the observations and recommend further course of actions. Based on available Telemetry data, detailed simulation studies were further carried out. The Apex Committee after thorough analysis of the simulation data concluded that the prime reason for the observation was found to be the drive signal not reaching the pyro valve of the oxidizer line of the engine meant for orbit raising.The committee concluded that the most likely cause for the observation is the disengagement of atleast one contacts (in each of the main and redundant paths) of the connector. The committee has provided a set of recommendations aimed at enhancing the redundancy and reliability of pyro system operations for future missions. In line with these recommendations, all the corrective actions were successfully implemented in CMS-03 spacecraft launched on November 2, 2025 by LVM-3 M5, and the pyro systems performed satisfactorily placing the satellite in the intended orbit. Further, these set of recommendations will be followed for all future missions, as applicable.

Announcement on START-2026 Inauguration Home / Announcement on START-2026 Inauguration February 24, 2026 ISRO opens up opportunity for students from Indian academic institutes as well as space enthusiasts to register for the fourth edition of Space science and Technology AwaReness Training (START) 2026 programme to be held in online mode during 11 th March - 2 nd April 2026 with the theme 'Observation from Space'. START offering lectures by pan-India experts in the domain of space science and technology. The deliberations comprise introductory level lectures on various aspects of space science and technology, tailored for post-graduate and preferably the final year under graduate students of physical sciences and technology. Registration for student participants from nodal centres and for individuals with minimum age of 20 years is open till 28 th February 2026. Link for participant registration: https://elearning.iirs.gov.in/edusatregistration/ START 2026 event will be inaugurated by Dr.V.Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary, DOS on 11 th March 2026 at 15:00 hrs.

Achievements of Department of Space - 2025 Home / Achievements - 2025 January 29, 2026 The year 2025 was an exciting &challenging year for the Indian Space Programme, where we achieved some major milestones. In 2025, we had around 231 accomplishments including the missions, ground tests, technology demonstration and all space related activities along with 12 Rohini Sounding Rocket flights and with every achievement the Department proved its excellence, heritage and outstanding teamwork. (A) Missions We had very significant missions in 2025 and each mission achieved something unique. The SPADEX mission successfully demonstrated autonomous docking and undocking, along with power transfer between satellites—a major step toward in-orbit servicing capabilities and docking operations on space stations. This was further complemented by the successful circumnavigation of the SPADEX satellites. This achievement made India the fourth nation to demonstrate docking in space. The PSLV Orbital Experimental Module (POEM-04), which was also part of the PSLV-C60 / SPADEX mission, flew with multiple payloads from ISRO, space startups& academia, fostering innovation through in-orbit experimentation. The POEM-4 completed more than 1000 orbits and was a highly successful POEM mission. The mission also demonstrated a robotic arm in-orbit and the germination of seeds in microgravity. The GSLV-F15/NVS-02 mission in January 2025 was the 100th mission to lift-off from Sriharikota. The launch vehicle performed excellently by precisely injecting the satellite to its intended orbit. The GSLV-F16/NISAR mission scored yet another first by becoming the first joint ISRO-NASA mission. It is significant that the one of the most expensive payloads in the earth observation segment with 12m unfurlable antenna from NASA was integrated on an Indian satellite bus and launched on an Indian launch vehicle. NISAR, the first dual frequency SAR satellite, along with NASA’s L-band SAR payload & ISRO’s S-band SAR payload is now fully operational. The LVM3-M5 / CMS-03 mission is another unique mission where we achieved the milestone of the heaviest GTO satellite form Indian soil. The LVM3-M6 / BlueBird Block-2 set the record of the launch of heaviest ever satellite from Indian soil. This mission also validated the electro-mechanical actuation for the S200 motor along with composite thrust frame for C25 stage and other modifications to improve the payload performance by 176kg. We can confidently say that the S200 EMA is globally the most powerful space qualified electric actuation system compared to the other launchers that use EMA for solid motors. Out of 10 missions (5 launch vehicles, 5 spacecraft, which includes a commercial spacecraft), 7 missions were successful. Our space assets have contributed immensely by providing continuous services for the safety and security of citizens. (B) Technology Demonstration tests This year, a breakthrough was achieved in testing of the Indigenous Semicryogenic engine and carried out the demonstration of re-ignition of Cryogenic engine thrust chamber in flight. In a related ground test, ignition of the CE-20 engine in boot strap mode was achieved in the ground test paving way for restartable cryogenic stage in future missions for mission flexibility. This is perhaps the first time a Gas Generator cycle engine is tested in bootstrap mode in the world. ISRO also demonstrated restart capability of the Vikas engine, towards demonstration of stage recovery in Vertical Take-off Vertical Landing mode and PS4 engine tests with stellite& Carbon-Carbon nozzles. The high thrust Electric propulsion system demonstrated 1000 hours of cumulative operations, and we are in the final stages of readiness and induction into TDS-01 satellite. The static test for the SS3 motor which is the third stage of SSLV vehicle was successfully carried out on December 30, 2025 for a duration of 108 seconds from SDSC, Sriharikota. The SS3 solid motor stage is the first Carbon-epoxy solid motor case realized by ISRO, which has significantly reduced the mass of the stage, thereby improving the payload performance of SSLV by 90 kg. (C) Gaganyaan Programme In this year, a lot of focus has been given to accelerate the Gaganyaan Programme. A High-Level Review Committee was constituted for close follow-up and comprehensive zero-based audit of documents was carried out. Required changes in the organisation structure of ECLSS were also carried out based on the competency available at the Centres. We are in the final phase of the first uncrewed mission.All propulsion tests have been completed for human rating. A lot of software simulations are in progress at the test beds and we need to complete the simulations and environmental tests at the earliest to clear the first uncrewed mission in line with the targeted schedule.Till date, more than 8000 ground tests including the various structural qualification tests have been completed. An Integrated Mission Review Committee was constituted, which is going through all critical aspects to fill the design & simulation gaps towards a more robust mission strategy. The Axiom-4 mission took the second Indian to space and the first Indian, Group Capt. Shubhanshu Shukla, to ISS, which is a significant milestone in our overall preparedness for the Gaganyaan Programme. became a household name after the mission and ISRO is deriving maximum benefit from his experience in the training, mission protocols and conducting microgravity experiments on the ISS. ISRO’s experience proved to be valuable when the Falcon-9 showed a leak in the LOX feedline in its booster stage. The subsequent interventions by the high-level team of ISRO ensured the safety of the 4 astronauts who had a fruitful mission to the ISS. The success of the Axiom-4 mission also validated the readiness of our Gaganyatris for a fully human rated mission. In addition, during the mission, the Gaganyatri successfully completed seven microgravity experiments conceptualized by Indian Research institutions with significant outcomes. The first Integrated Air Drop test validated the end-to-end deployment of the parachutes in the Crew Module and its recovery from sea. The next test is getting ready by the end of this month. Tests were also carried out at Chandigarh for demonstration of drogue parachutes deployment for Gaganyaan. (D) Space-Sector Reforms and Handholding NGEs DOS has been supporting the activities of NGEs in the country as part of the space-sector reforms through IN-SPACe. ISRO’s facilities are being utilized by the space start-ups for their tests and system requirements. 40 activities have been completedand about 34 are either ongoing or are under discussions. The first stage solid motor for the launch vehicle developed by a space start-up was realized by Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC),Sriharikota. The static tests for the 1st and 2nd stage motors were carried out at SDSC. The first orbital launch for this vehicle is expected early this year. SSLV technology transfer has been signed with HAL and development flight is targeted in 2 years. A PPP was concluded with a consortium for a 12-satellite constellation for earth observation. A private industry player has been authorized to build and deploy a communication satellite for the first time. (E) Applications On the Applications side, a lot of milestones were completed. The Department continued to provide disaster management support and also developed various Geospatial solutions for various ministries. On the suggestion of Honourable PM, the Department has also submitted the utilization of all the satellites launched till date by ISRO. Integrated Control Room for Emergency Response(ICR-ER) was inaugurated by Hon’ble Union Home Minister on 16th June 2025 for which NRSC provided the NDEM 5.0 which is the key backbone. Lightning Visualization portal has been operationalised using near Real Time data providing hourly & daily lightning strikes. A Forest Resource and Analysis System was developed by NESAC for the Govt. of Manipur. National Level Grid Digital Postal Index Number (DIGIPIN) and unique address identification system Postal Digital Address Code (PDAC) developed. We have mapped all the major floods in the country and around 300 flood maps of 21 states have been disseminated. A Salt Pan atlas & Soil Resource Atlas for the country was compiled. Paddy residue burnt area mapping was done over Punjab and Haryana. (F) Infrastructure Development This year saw a lot of infrastructure getting either approved or commissioned. The Third Launch Pad Project was approved by the Union Cabinet at a cost of about Rs. 4000 Crores. The civil works commenced at the SSLV Launch Complex atKulasekarapattinamincluding the launch pad facility and is targetedfor readiness by August 2026 and an orbital launch from the facility by the end of this year. The indigenous 10-ton Propellant Mixer for Solid motors was commissioned which is the highest capacity in the country to enable higher throughput for solid motor casting.We have also commissioned the second process line at the Ammonium Perchlorate plant to double the throughput for Ammonium Perchlorate required for solid propellant processing. A state-of-the-art manufacturing facility for titanium alloy tanks was inaugurated at Tumkur along with the new monopropellant thruster test facility.Similarly, the Cryogenic Turbopump Test facility and the new satellite thruster test facility are also inaugurated this year. A state-of-the-art Landing Gear drop test facility was inaugurated for the RLV programme, which is the only facility in the country that simulates actual run-way surface. (G) Space Science This year, a separate Space Science & Astronomy vertical was created to provide focus and direction to the Space Science activities in the country. Several National meets related to Chandrayaan 4, Chandrayaan 5 and Venus Orbiter mission were conducted and there is a growing user community for space science in the nation. Chandrayaan-2, Chandrayaan-3, Aditya-L1, XPoSat and Astrosat missions continue to provide scientific data for new discoveries and studies in the Lunar/Solar environment. (H) Collaboration with other Departments ISRO's expertise is being utilized in other nationally important ventures such as the Samudrayaan Programme for exploring ocean depths up to 6 km. ISRO is realizing the personnel sphere and the full-scale welding is in progress. We are also collaborating with DAE for the RHU & RTG requirements for the future Chandrayaan& Mars missions for which a meeting was held with Secretary, DAE and his team. The ISRO-funded Niobiumproduction plant was commissioned at Nuclear Fuel Complex, Hyderabad.Discussions were also held for the development of Nuclear Propulsion for future missions. ISRO and CSIR had a Space Meet, where the potential areas of collaboration in the Gaganyaan programme were identified. Framework MoU with Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology on cooperation in Space Medicine signed.MoU with AIIMS is finalized and is planned to be signed in January 2026. Space Food items developed in collaboration with DRDO were successfully inducted and flown to ISS in Axiom-4 mission (I) Major Events This year three major events were conducted by the Department and also played a leading role in a major international conference. GLEX 2025 , that was held in India in May 2025, was a huge success and the event marked a major milestone in India’s growing space leadership bringing together 1500 participants from 36 countries. We saw a record 1275 abstracts submitted from 57 countries, of which 44% came from students—a true sign of growing interest in space exploration. On the suggestion of Honourable PM, a DOS Chintan Shivir was conducted this year with the theme “Implementation of Space Vision 2047 & looking beyond 2047”and deliberations were carried out across 11 domains on the theme. National Meet 2.0 was conducted 10 years after the 1st Meet in 2015, that was held on the directions of Honourable PM. The theme was on Leveraging Space Technology & Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047. More than 300 meetings were conducted in just 3 months with 63 user ministries/departments and 36 State Governments/UTs. A Mission Roadmap for 2040 has been created to meet the user requirements captured during the meetings. The second National Space Day was celebrated at New Delhi and an interaction with Space Startups was held on the day. 125 events across 7 zones of the country were held and 1.5 lakh students & 15000 teachers from approx. 750 schools & institutes participated. (J) Capacity Building & Outreach Our capacity building &outreach activities have also expanded significantly this year. The unique program on the “North East Student’s Program for Awareness, Reach and Knowledge on Space” (NE-SPARKS) program has exposed 786 students (378 boys 408 girls) from the 8 states of North East region of India to the world of space and science.Our annual Yuvika programmes are well appreciated and sees lot of participation. This year 580 students visited SDSC as part of Jagriti Yatra. ISRO Academia connect programme was recently held covering all states across the nation. 41 new NGOs/Start-ups/institutes have been identified as ISRO registered space tutors. This year a special programme for around 4000 teachers was conducted to empower school teachers. The Department has initiated a book writing campaign towards outreach and skill development targeting students at school and college levels, we are targeting atleast 75 booksin 2026. A Space Technology Incubation Centre was inaugurated in NIT, Rourkela and a document was released – Research Areas in Space 2025 for academic collaboration. To position India as a leader in global space education fostering innovation, collaboration and economic growth, it is planned for establishment of Global Space Institute in India under DoS. (K) Atmanirbharata in Semiconductor Area The Government has been giving lot of importance to Atmanirbharata in Semiconductor Area. We are not far behind in this area and we have demonstrated self-reliance in critical electronic components. The 32-bit Vikram Processor, the first 32-bit processor qualified for use in space applications, and jointly developed by ISRO with SCL was presented to Honourable PM during the Semicon India 2025 event in September. An indigenous 250nm process technology was developed for fabrication of RF Gallium Nitride High Electron Mobility Transistor. An indigenous baseband ASIC to support NavIC& other GNSS signals has been realized on 28nm technology for use in civilian and strategic platforms. (L) International Cooperation In the area of International Cooperation, we have signed Agreements of various nature with 10 Space Agencies, conducted about 125 bilateral meetings and 75 multilateral meetings, about 32 foreign dignitaries and delegations have visited ISRO.India has also taken over the BRICS presidency. The already launched NISAR along with the upcoming collaborative missions like G20 satellite, TRISHNA & LUPEX are elevating India as a preferred partner in global flagship missions. (M) Awards & Recognition This year brought 23 nos. of national & international laurels including major awards like IAA Von Karman Award of 2025, AIAA Goddard Astronautics award for Chandrayaan-3 landing, Broglio Award by Italian Aerospace Industry Association, Vigyan Sri Puraskar 2025, Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar 2025, ASI and National Geospatial Award 2025. Department of Space was also awarded Rajbhasha Kirti Award (Second Prize) for the year 2024–25 for the best implementation of Official Language Hindi. This prize is awarded by Department of Official Language for effective implementation of Official Language policy.

Call for Registration: ISRO START 2026 Programme for Academic Institutions Home / Call for Registration: ISRO START 2026 Programme for Academic Institutions January 23, 2026 ISRO opens up opportunity for Indian academic institutes to register for the fourth edition of Space science and Technology AwaReness Training (START) 2026 programme with the theme ‘Observation from Space’ to be held during March-April 2026. START is an annual event organised by ISRO offering online lectures by pan-India experts in the domain of space science and technology, spanning a duration of around three weeks. The deliberations comprise introductory level lectures on various aspects of space science and technology, tailored for post-graduate and preferably the final year under graduate students of physical sciences and technology. Expression of interest is sought from the academic institutes in India to host this online programme as nodal centres. Academic institutes in India may register their Expression of Interest in the prescribed format by February 13, 2026 through https://jigyasa.iirs.gov.in/START Registration for student participants from nodal centres is open during 18-28 February 2026 and registration for individual category with a minimum age of 20 years is open till 28 th February 2026. Link for participant registration: https://elearning.iirs.gov.in/edusatregistration/

Observations of the Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS with the PRL 1.2m telescope at Mount Abu Home / Observations of the Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS with the PRL 1.2m telescope at Mount Abu November 19, 2025 The scientists from Physical Research Laboratory (PRL) observed the interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS currently on its way out of the inner Solar system after perihelion passage. Observations were carried out in imaging and spectroscopic (analysis of the constituent wavelengths of the light emitted) modes with PRL’s 1.2m telescope. The images (false colour representation in Fig. 1) show a near-circular coma. The coma of a comet is the large, glowing atmosphere of gas and dust that forms around its nucleus as it gets closer to the Sun. It is created when the Sun's heat causes the frozen ices on the nucleus to vaporize, or "sublimate," releasing gas and dust that form a large, diffuse cloud. In the present observing geometry, the dust tail, if present, would be pointing away from the Sun behind the comet as seen from the Earth, while deep wide field multiband images may show the ion tail. Fig. 1: False colour image of Comet 3I/ATLAS with the 1.2m telescope at Mt Abu using a wide area imager in the red filter. Two fainter background stars are also seen in this image. Apart from imaging, scientists also acquired a spectrum of the light from the comet, before the start of morning twilight. The result shows prominent emission features commonly seen in Solar system comets - the CN, C2 and C3 bands in the shorter wavelength side of the spectrum (Fig. 2). Fig. 2: Flux-normalised spectrum of Comet 3I/ATLAS using the LISA spectrograph. In the terminology of comet, the rate of release (or sublimation) of gas from the nucleus into the coma is referred to as the ‘production rate’, which is a measure of the comet's activity level. The production rate varies significantly throughout the comet's orbit and is driven by factors like distance from the sun and the comet's internal composition. In case of 3I/ATLAS, the production rates for the prominent bands (emissions pertaining to the constituent molecules) were computed with limiting values around 1025 molecules/sec. The production rate ratios seem to place this comet in the class of ‘typical comets’ of the solar system. Further observations will be continued as the comet gradually comes into the darker part of the night. The Physical Research Laboratory (PRL) 1.2 m telescope at Mount Abu, located at an altitude of 1680 m near Gurushikhar, is a ground-based observatory that is used for astronomical research, including exoplanet hunting, high-energy phenomena, and solar system studies. These observations were made during November 12-15, 2025.

Celebrating a Decade of India’s first Astronomy Observatory AstroSat Home / AstroSat September 28, 2025 On September 28, 2025 AstroSat ( https://www.isro.gov.in/AstroSat.html ) India’s first multi wavelength space observatory dedicated for astronomy, completed a decade filled with groundbreaking discoveries and dedicated service to the global scientific community. AstroSat was launched aboard the PSLV-C30 on September 28, 2015 from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre. AstroSat is capable of observing the universe simultaneously in broad energy range from ultraviolet (UV), visible, and high energy X-rays rendering it a powerful tool for understanding various cosmic phenomena. AstroSat began its scientific journey by solving a two decade old puzzle involving a red giant star unusually bright in both ultraviolet (UV) light and Infrared. Since then, it has continued to deliver remarkable results. Among its many outstanding discoveries is the detection of far-UV photons from an astonishing distance of around 9 billion light-years captured using the sharpest, wide angle UV eye in space ( https://www.isro.gov.in/AstroSat discover.html ), showing that the emission from butterfly nebula extends three times more than earlier known size ( https://www.isro.gov.in/AstroSat_Picture_of_the_month_Oct_2018.html ), X-ray polarization studies ( https://www.isro.gov.in/AstroSat Picture of the Month (May 2018).html ), a star reliving its youth ( https://www.isro.gov.in/AstroSat Picture apr3.html ), merging of galaxies ( https://www.isro.gov.in/AstroSat Picture of the Month(June 2018).html ), discovery of very fast spinning black holes and numerous other findings on X-ray emission from binary stars in the Milky way. AstroSat is a real example of multi institute mission. In addition to major ISRO centers like URSC, LEOS, SAC, VSSC, PRL many Indian research institutes like TIFR, IIA, IUCAA have contributed to the development of four out of the five scientific payloads onboard AstroSat. UVIT and SXT also collaborated with Canadian Space Agency (CSA) and University of Leicester, UK respectively making AstroSat a true international collaboration effort. The global nature of AstroSat becomes more prominent when we consider the users of AstroSat. AstroSat has a registered userbase close to 3400 from 57 countries world over from countries like US to Afghanistan and Angola. Within India, AstroSat has helped popularize space science, bringing astrophysics research into 132 Indian universities . About half of the observatory's users are Indian scientists and students, fostering a new generation of astronomers. Though AstroSat has far exceeded its design life, all the five scientific experiments onboard AstroSat are working satisfactorily and the observatory is expected to continue to provide many more new and exciting results in the coming years. Figure 1: NGC 2336 a barred spiral galaxy 100 million light years away as seen by AstroSat UVIT Figure 2: NGC1365 as seen by AstroSat UVIT is also known as Fornax propeller galaxy is a double barred galaxy at a distance of 56 million light years away.

Announcement of Opportunity (AO) for utilizing archival data of Planet Venus for scientific analysis Home / Announcement of Opportunity (AO) for utilizing archival data of Planet Venus for scientific analysis September 25, 2025 UPDATE: Deadline for submission of proposals extended to November 30, 2025 Introduction: Solar system studies have seen a remarkable growth in the last few decades, due to advances in space technology, observational capabilities and computational technologies. This has enhanced our knowledge and understanding of the diversity of complex processes across the Solar system. Planetary exploration provides opportunities to find clues to the origin and evolution of planetary systems and how they are different or similar to each other. In this connection, the Indian government has approved the Venus Orbiter Mission (VOM), aiming to explore and study Venus, the sister planet of the Earth. The mission, to be conducted by the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), Department of Space, will involve a spacecraft orbiting Venus to study its surface, atmosphere, and the Sun-Venus interaction. Annexure-1 presents a table listing the payloads for the VOM. In order to promote, strengthen and to increase the scientific user community for the Venus Orbiter Mission, ISRO invites researchers through the AO call for promoting the analysis and modelling of archival data available for the planet Venus. Novel research proposals are invited under the following research areas of interest Venusian Morphology, topography and sub-surface studies Geological mapping, mineralogy and surface composition of Venus Venusian atmosphere structure, dynamics and composition Venusian Ionosphere and solar wind interaction Modelling of Venusian Atmospheres and Ionospheres Objective of the AO: This Announcement of Opportunity (AO) call is solicited from interested scientists within India for utilizing the archival data available from the Venus missions. The payloads recommended for VOM is listed in Table.1 in Annexure-1. This AO call is addressed to all institutions in India. Those sending proposals may be currently involved in atmospheric or planetary exploration studies. How to write and submit the proposal The complete proposal form to be forwarded by Head of the Institutions along with the seal. Two hardcopies of the form to be sent to the following address: Director, Science Programme Office, ISRO Head Quarters, Antariksh Bhavan, New BEL Road, Bangalore-560094 The soft copy of the proposal to be mailed to venus_AO[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in with the subject Attn: Venus Science AO . Any proposal, received without the forwarding letter from Head of the Institutions, will not be considered. Who can submit proposal: Proposals could be submitted by individuals or a group of scientists and academicians belonging to national institutions, Universities, Colleges, planetaria and government organizations of India. Only those having a minimum remaining service of four years before superannuation are eligible to lead the project as PI. The proposals must be forwarded through the Head of the Institutions, with appropriate assurance for providing necessary facilities for carrying out the project under this AO programme. Review of the proposal In order to identify the most optimum suite of proposals, the proposers may be requested to interact with a review committee constituted by ISRO as and when required. The final selected proposals are expected to incorporate suggestions made by the review committee. Project duration: It is expected that project to be completed within 3 years. PIs are expected to present the results in a Venus science workshop to be conducted as and when announced. PIs are also encouraged to publish the results from these studies in national/international peer reviewed journals and present their results in national/international conferences/symposia. Support for the selected proposals: The selected project proposals through this AO will be provided limited financial support towards meeting the salary of a research student, computational facility, contingencies and limited support to attend project meetings and workshops. The project duration is for the duration of three years starting from the release of the fund. Important note: Any update or modifications to this AO will be reflected in the revised AO which will be posted on www.isro.gov.in under ‘Updates’. The proposers are requested to check the above URL periodically to keep themselves updated. Guidelines for Proposal Preparation The Principal Investigator (PI) should submit the proposal in a format described in the following sections (Annexure-2&3). The format for proposal includes a Declaration to be signed by the Principal Investigator and the Head of the Institution (Annexure-4). 9.1 Instructions for Submitting a Proposal Proposals should be limited to around 10 pages in length on standard A4 size paper, typed double-spaced and in the prescribed format. Two hardcopies of the proposal prepared as per the formats given in Annexure-2, Annexure -3 and Annexure-4 are to be sent to: Director, Science Programme Office ISRO Head Quarters, Antariksh Bhavan, New BEL Road, Bangalore-560094 The duly signed soft copies of the proposal to be mailed to venus_AO[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in with the subject Attn: Venus Science AO. 9.2 Description of the Proposal The main part of the proposal should contain a summary (briefing the objectives, methodology, deliverables of the project and the time schedule), followed by a detailed description of the objectives and the scientific rationale being addressed. The data requirement and the analysis methods should be highlighted. The methodology or approach to be followed, the expected results of the project must be presented. Targeted schedule for various milestones of the project must be indicated including the completion date. 9.2.1 Project Duration It is expected that the project will be completed within 3 years. PIs are expected to present the results in a science workshop to be conducted as and when announced. PIs are also expected to publish the results from these studies in national/international peer reviewed journals and present their results in national/international conferences/symposia. 9.2.2 Data Requirements As described in section 9.2, the proposal should identify and utilize archived data from space science missions to Venus for the proposed study. The project proposals should clearly indicate the study area and the data sets required. 9.2.3 Personnel The project may involve joint efforts involving many individuals from the concerned institution(s). However, only one PI will be recognized. Other participants could be designated as “Co-Investigators”. PI/Co-Investigator shall provide Curriculum Vitae (CV) referring to educational qualifications, the work carried out in the related areas and list of recent publications. The PI is responsible for ensuring timely completion of the project. The assurance of necessary administrative and financial spending support to PI and Co-Investigators from Head of the Institution(s) is a must. Every project can appoint a Junior Research Fellow (JRF) as per RESPOND norms . He/ She may be encouraged to take up Ph.D. 9.2.4 Facilities and Equipment Describe available computer facilities, image analysis software packages and other equipment in the home institution or in sister concerns that are accessible for the project. 9.2.5 Project Evaluation It is proposed that a workshop may be conducted at the end of every year for the purpose of reviewing the progress of the AO projects and sharing the results with the Venusian scientific community. PIs of each project are expected to attend these workshops and brief about the progress of the respective project. Terms and Conditions ISRO reserves the right to scrutinize or reject any or all proposals received in response to this AO, or suggest a modification to the proposal. ISRO reserves the right to choose any project(s) proposals received in response to this AO, depending upon need, novelty of intended applications, innovative science, suitability, delivery and merits. The decision of ISRO shall be treated as final. ISRO reserves the right to revoke in part or in whole its support for a project at any time without assigning any reason. It shall be declared and ensured by the PIs of the selected project proposal under this AO, that any/all analysis conducted as part of this project shall not use any pirated/un-licensed copy of the analysis software used. All proposals will be reviewed by a review committee constituted by ISRO. PIs and their team shall cooperate with the members of the review committee for the review of their proposal. Scientific results obtained as part of the project proposal by PIs or any other, shall not be allowed to be used for marketing/business purposes without prior permission from ISRO. ISRO reserves the right to accord permission on such cases, considering the overall national interests. Any/ All Intellectual Property (IP) Rights such as patents, copyrights, design rights etc. acquired by the research academic/institute or the PI, through this project proposal, shall be jointly owned by ISRO and the research institute. Proposer shall give a declaration that if the proposal is selected for funding by ISRO, PI shall not submit the same proposal for funding support from other agencies. Any commercialization of such IP rights shall be done by the research institute only with the consent / permission of ISRO, on specific terms and conditions, which shall be determined on a case by case basis by ISRO as per its standard practices for such activities. The user will make available to the scientific community the salient results of the AO projects through publication in appropriate journals or other established channels. Acknowledgement of ISRO support/ funding must be made in all reports and publications arising out of the AO projects. Copies of all publications resulting from these research projects must be submitted to the Science Programme Office, ISRO HQ. The PI is required to submit yearly progress report during the duration of the project to the Science Programme Office, ISRO HQ. A detailed report is to be submitted during the mid-term and final reviews in soft copy form. General rules and guidelines of RESPOND will be followed The declaration contained in the proposal format must be signed by the PI and Head of the Institution (Annexure-4). Otherwise the proposal will not be considered valid and will be rejected. 10.1 SCHEDULE Deadline for submission of proposals: November 15, 2025. Annexure-1 567 KB Annexure-2 345 KB Annexure-3 374 KB Annexure-4 344 KB

CII International Space Conference 2025: Showcasing ISRO’s Leadership and Global Collaboration Home / CII International Space Conference 2025: Showcasing ISRO’s Leadership and Global Collaboration September 17, 2025 The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), in collaboration with ISRO, IN-SPACe, and NSIL successfully hosted the International Conference on Space 2025, on September 8–9, 2025 at Bengaluru, India. Themed “Harnessing Space for Global Progress: Innovation, Policy, and Growth,” this two-day event solidified India’s position as a global space leader by fostering innovation, strengthening indigenous capabilities, and promoting international collaboration. This conference brought together 650+ delegates, government leaders, industry stalwarts & global experts. On September 8, 2025, the conference began with an inaugural session. A video message by Hon’ble Union Minister Dr. Jitendra Singh and key addresses were delivered by Dr. V Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO & Secretary, DoS, Air Marshal Tejinder Singh AVSM VM, Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Training Command, Mr Mohan, CMD, New Space India Limited (NSIL). Highlighting recent milestones, the Minister referred to the success of Chandrayaan-3, which placed India among the leading spacefaring nations by becoming the first to land near the lunar south polar region. He also pointed to the achievements of Group Captain Shubhanshu Shukla, the first Indian to travel to the ISS, and outlined India’s upcoming exploration missions to Moon, Mars and Venus, alongside the human spaceflight programme Gaganyaan. Dr. V. Narayanan emphasized role of reforms initiated under Hon’ble Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s leadership which led to 350+ startups actively engaged in space related activities. He noted that the true value of space lies in its applications across everyday life - from agriculture and health to education, urban development, and governance. Special felicitations were extended to astronauts Grp Capt Shubhanshu Shukla and Grp Capt Prasanth Balakrishnan Nair. Inaugural session was followed by engaging discussions on bridging gaps in achieving India’s space vision, the private sector’s role in accelerating the NewSpace economy, and strategies for self-reliance through indigenous capabilities. On September 9, 2025, sessions explored the space economy, delving into policy frameworks, regulatory developments, and opportunities for startups and international partnerships, with Denmark as the Guest Country. The conference served as a dynamic platform to showcase ISRO’s pivotal contributions to India’s space advancements, alongside the instrumental roles of IN-SPACe and NSIL in nurturing a thriving ecosystem for startups, academia, and industry.

National Space Day 2025: Celebrating India’s Space Journey from Aryabhatta to Gaganyaan Home /NSpD 2025 August 24, 2025 The 2 nd National Space Day (NSpD 2025) was celebrated with grandeur and pride on 23 rd August 2025 at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi , with the theme “ Aryabhatta to Gaganyaan: Ancient Wisdom to Infinite Possibilities ”. The event was not just a commemoration but a reflection of India’s collective aspirations in space science and technology, bringing together the nation’s policymakers, scientists, industry leaders, innovators, studentsand the public. This year's celebration was preceded by National Meet 2025 (NM 2.0) , held on 22 nd August 2025 , on the theme “Leveraging Space Technology and Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047.” The decision to integrate the National Meet with the Space Day proved immensely fruitful, creating a unique convergence of ministries, state governments, industry, startups, academia and space enthusiasts . National Space Day 2025 (NSpD 2.0): A Celebration of Achievements and Aspirations On 23 rd August 2025 , the spotlight shifted to celebrating India’s space achievements and inspiring the next generation. Inaugural Session Highlights A video message from the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, setting the tone with his vision for India’s space future. Inaugural address by the Hon’ble Minister of State for Space, Dr. Jitendra Singh , who also distributed prizes to winners of the ISRO Robotics Challenge and the Bhartiya Antariksh Hackathon , both of which saw overwhelming nationwide participation A special highlight of the inaugural event was the presence of India’s four Gaganyatris , who joined the Hon’ble Minister of State for Space, Dr. Jitendra Singh , on stage. They shared their experiences and inspired students and youth, leaving a lasting impression on the audience Release of outcome reports from National Meet 2025 (NM 2.0) and the Chintan Shivir 2025 , symbolizing India’s forward-looking policy approach A walkthrough of the space exhibition , showcasing contributions from industries, startups and ISRO centres Inspiring Sessions and Discussions The post-inaugural programme was rich and engaging: A Keynote Address by Prof. Ajay Kumar Sood, Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India , emphasized the transformative role of space technology in national progress Four Panel Discussions provided multi-dimensional perspectives: 1. Space Vision 2047: Integrated Implementation at National Level - with stakeholders from government, industry, academiaand strategic sectors 2. Space Economy: Marching towards Targeted Achievements - evaluating reforms and economic opportunities in the space sector 3. SHE in Space - women leaders sharing their perspectives on inclusivity and diversity in the space ecosystem 4. Astronauts Panel: Down to Earth, Up in Space - India’s Gaganyatris narrating their journeys, sparking curiosity and inspiration among students and youth The exhibition also drew enthusiastic participation, with over 1,400 students and hundreds of teachers interacting with astronauts, scientists and industry representatives, creating a memorable experience for young minds. Nationwide Engagement: A Celebration Across India The 2025 celebrations went far beyond Delhi, culminating months of zonal events held across the country. ISRO Centres and Units organized nearly 100 outreach activities across 28 States and 8 Union Territories , directly reaching an estimated 1.5 lakh students and 15,000 teachers . In addition to physical participation, the celebrations attracted a remarkable digital audience. More than 1.25 lakh viewers joined online through livestreaming and social media platforms , ensuring that the spirit of National Space Day reached every corner of the nation and engaged a truly diverse audience. Two national-level competitions added further excitement to the celebrations: The ISRO Robotics Challenge , which began with 222 teams, culminated in a grand finale featuring 16 top teams. The Bhartiya Antariksh Hackathon , which drew enthusiastic participation from students and innovators nationwide, showcased creativity in solving real-world challenges through space applications The winners of both competitions were honoured during the inaugural session, embodying the spirit of innovation, problem-solving, and youthful energy that defines India’s future in space. National Meet 2025 (NM 2.0): Building the Roadmap for 2047 Scientific Secretary, ISRO, M Ganesh Pillai welcomed all to the National meet. The Meet commenced with an inaugural session attended by senior dignitaries including Dr. V. K. Saraswat, Member, NITI Aayog, Dr. V. Narayanan, Secretary, Department of Space; Chairman, Space Commission; and Chairman, ISRO and Dr. Pawan Kumar Goenka, Chairman, IN-SPACe. The session highlighted the role of space in national development, followed by the inauguration of an exhibition that showcased innovations from startups, research institutions and industry. The heart of NM 2.0 lay in its ten breakout sessions , which were ‘houseful’ withenthusiastic participation. These covered critical areas such as: Agriculture & Water Forest, Environment, Energy & Policy Infrastructure Development & Geo-Governance Health, Education & Social Welfare Communication, Navigation & Technology Diffusion Disaster Risk Reduction Ocean, Weather & Earth Resources North-Eastern & Hilly States/UTs Coastal States/UTs Inland States/UTs Each group brought together experts from government, industry and academia to identify sectoral demands and opportunities for space technology applications. The Industry Session saw leading companies and startups present their cutting-edge solutions in geospatial analytics, Earth observation and downstream applications, underlining the vibrancy of India’s emerging space economy. The Concluding Session , addressed Dr. P. K. Mishra, Principal Secretary to the Prime minister, summarized the deliberations and presented a roadmap to build national space infrastructure for 2047 . The day ended with a cultural programme , adding colour and energy to the scientific discussions. Looking Ahead The Scientific Secretary , ISRO, M Ganesh Pillai summarized the proceedings of National Meet 2025 (NM2.0), National Space Day 2025 (NSpD 2.0) and the months-long zonal events leading up to them , highlighting the key outcomes and thanking all participants, organisers and partners for making the celebrations so engaging and fruitful. National Space Day 2025 was not just a commemoration of milestones,it was a call to action for the nation. The insights from the National Meet, the enthusiasm of the youth, the collaboration across sectors and the vision shared by leaders all point towards an inclusive, technology-driven and ambitious space future for Viksit Bharat @2047. As the curtains close on these celebrations, every participant returns inspired, carrying renewed vigor to contribute to India’s space journey and its role in shaping a self-reliant, developed nation.

Indian Satellite data based analysis of the Dharali Flash Flood Home / Indian Satellite data based analysis of the Dharali Flash Flood August 07, 2025 A catastrophic flash flood triggered by intense rainfall caused debris-laden flows over Dharali and Harsil villages, in Uttarkashi district, Uttarakhand, on the 5th August 2025. The sudden deluge swept away homes, buildings, bridges, roads, and claimed human lives. National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) / ISRO carried out rapid assessment of the damage using very high-resolution satellite images of India’s Cartosat-2S satellites. The comparative analysis of satellite images of 07.08.2025 (post-event) and available cloud-free pre-event data (13.06.2024) revealed the extent and severity of the destruction. The salient findings include: Indications of flash flood, with widened stream channels, altered river morphology and damage to human lives & infrastructure. Fan-shaped deposit of sediment & debris at Dharali village (~20ha area, ~750m X ~450m), at the confluence of the Kheer Gad & Bhagirathi River. Partial / complete destruction and disappearance of several buildings in the flood-affected zone, likely submerged or swept away by the intense mud flow and debris. A number of buildings appear to be submerged with mud / debris, in Dharali village. The satellite images would help the ongoing search & rescue operations to reach out to stranded individuals and restore connectivity to the isolated region. The event highlights increasing vulnerability of Himalayan settlements to disasters. Scientific analysis is being carried out to ascertain the cause of the triggering event.

Space on Wheels: Inspiring Jharkhand, Bihar, and Telangana with Space Science Home /Space on Wheels August 02, 2025 ISRO has been inspiring young minds and fostering curiosity about space science through its innovative "Space on Wheels" outreach program. This mobile exhibition initiative brings the wonders of space exploration directly to students and communities across India, making science accessible even in remote areas. Recent events in states like Telangana, Jharkhandand Bihar have showcased ISRO's commitment to engaging the public with interactive displays and educational content. Notably, at Osmania University and Vigyan Vaibhav in Gachibowli, Hyderabad, over 31,000 students enthusiastically participated, immersing themselves in the marvels of space technology. Similarly, the exhibition at Sainik School in Rukmapur, Karimnagar district, on April 8, 2025, captivated young learners, sparking their interest in India’s space endeavors. The initiative made a significant impact at Ravi's Brilliant School in Katedan, Hyderabad where 1,500 students benefited from the interactive experience. Space on Wheels in Telangana State In Jharkhand and Bihar, the Space on Wheels program reached an impressive 30,000 individuals, covering villages, towns, and educational institutions in 20 different locations, ensuring that the excitement of space exploration transcends geographical barriers Space on Wheels in Jharkhand State By taking space science directly to schools and communities, ISRO’s Space on Wheels fosters a deeper understanding of space technology and inspires the next generation of scientists, engineers, and explorers. This outreach effort underscores ISRO’s mission to not only advance space research but also ignite a passion for science among India’s youth, paving the way for a brighter, more innovative future.

ISRO organizes Space Analog Mission in Tso Kar Valley, Ladakh Home / ISRO organizes Space Analog Mission in Tso Kar Valley, Ladakh August 1, 2025 Indian Human Spaceflight Programme is a national endeavor led by ISRO and aims to extend the human presence across solar system, starting with human spaceflight missions to Low Earth Orbit (LEO) and achieving Indian Crewed Lunar Landing by 2040. This requires undertaking systematic studies to generate necessary Indian subject data for addressing various physiological, psychological and operational challenges associated with human space flight missions. In this regard, ground based analog missions in environment simulating certain aspects of a typical human space mission provide an opportunity to understand the human health and performance risks. Human Space Flight Centre (HSFC) of ISRO is leading this endeavor for ISRO's upcoming human space missions. HSFC team led the Ladakh Human Analog Mission (LHAM) in November, 2024 as well as partnered in the recently concluded ten-day Isolation Study 'Anugami' involving ISRO's Gaganyatri in July, 2025. Continuing this endeavor, on 31 st July, 2025, Dr V Narayanan, Secretary, Department of Space & Chairman, ISRO inaugurated the Himalayan Outpost for Planetary Exploration (HOPE) analog mission setup in Tso Kar Valley, Ladakh During his inaugural address, Dr. V.Narayanan stressed that this analog mission is more than a simulation, rather it is a rehearsal for the future. He also noted that in line with Hon'ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modiji's vision, the space sector has been opened up to enable greater participation from Indian industry. This analog mission with an industry partner showcases the new era of public-private synergy that is taking shape in Indian space ecosystem. Post inauguration, industry partner will be organising 10-day (from 1 st to 10 th August, 2025) HOPE analog mission with the shortlisted experiments from partnering national institutions such as IIST & RGCB, Trivandrum; IIT Hyderabad; IIT, Bombay; and the Institute for Aerospace Medicine, Bangalore. Investigators from these institutes will examine epigenetic, genomic, physiological and psychological responses of two analog mission crew members and validate health-monitoring protocols, planetary surface operations, and refine sample collection and microbial analysis techniques. The valuable data generated through these Analog Missions organized by HSFC will form the basis for design of protocols and infrastructure for future Indian Human Exploration Missions by providing key insights into technology performance, crew workflows, and environmental adaptation. HOPE is a specially designed Dia 8 metre Habitat Module for crew living and a Dia 5 metre Utility Module for operations and support systems which are interconnected for seamless workflow. Tso Kar valley was specifically selected for this analog mission due to its striking environmental parallels with early Mars, due to high UV flux, low air pressure, cold extremes and saline permafrost. Secretary, DOS & Chairman, ISRO inaugurating the space analog mission HOPE Setup at Tso Kar Valley, Ladakh

Regional Meet on "Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047" Home / Regional Meet on "Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047" July 29, 2025 The Regional Meet on “Leveraging Space Technology Applications for Viksit Bharat 2047” for the states of Gujarat, Daman & Diu, and Dadra & Nagar Haveli was held on 22 nd July 2025 at Narmada Hall, Swarnim Sankul, Sachivalaya, Gandhinagar. The event was organized by the Space Applications Centre (SAC), ISRO, Ahmedabad, in collaboration with the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of Gujarat. This regional meet aimed to consolidate inputs from participating States and Union Territories for the upcoming National Meet 2025. Discussions focused on identifying space infrastructure needs across various sectors and departments, as well as exploring new avenues for space technology applications at the state level. The event was inaugurated by the Hon'ble Chief Minister of Gujarat, Shri Bhupendra Bhai Patel. More than 180 participants, including government officials from Gujarat and the Union Territories, as well as representatives from ISRO, NSIL, IN-SPACe, and non-governmental entities (NGEs), attended the meet. The program began with a traditional prayer and lamp-lighting ceremony led by dignitaries. Shri Nilesh M. Desai, Director of SAC, delivered the welcome address. He paid tribute to Dr. Vikram Sarabhai for his foundational role in India's space program and highlighted the significance of space technology in driving societal progress. He also spoke about current space-based initiatives underway in Gujarat. Ms. Mona K. Khandhar, Principal Secretary, DST, Government of Gujarat, delivered the inaugural speech. She emphasized the role of space technology in enhancing governance and proudly announced that Gujarat is the first state in India to adopt a dedicated Space Technology Policy. She also shared plans to establish space-related facilities for NGEs in the Ahmedabad region. The technical sessions featured expert lectures from ISRO, NSIL, IN-SPACe, and NGEs. Attendees were also shown video presentations on the NISAR Mission and Gujarat's Space Tech Policy. Shri Shashikant Sharma, Team Lead for Gujarat and the UTs, delivered the concluding remarks, summarizing the key outcomes of the Regional Meet. He extended gratitude to the Government of Gujarat officials and ISRO scientists for their contributions to the successful organization of the event. Glimpses of Regional Meet

Axiom-4 Mission: Successful Undocking of Crew Dragon Spacecraft with Gaganyatri from ISS Home / Axiom-4 Mission: Successful Undocking of Crew Dragon Spacecraft with Gaganyatri from ISS July 14, 2025 On July 14, 2025 (16:45 hrs IST), Crew Dragon spacecraft carrying four crew members including Gaganyatri Shubhanshu Shukla successfully undocked from International Space Station (ISS) for its return journey back to Earth. Initial separation of Dragon from ISS was achieved through first departure burn and distance between Crew Dragon Spacecraft & ISS was gradually increased through additional departure burn. Post undocking from ISS during the free flight regime of the Crew Dragon Spacecraft, the Gaganyatri will take scheduled rest breaks, monitor various onboard systems especially during further planned departure and deorbit burns. Following deorbit burn which will initiate reentry, the Crew Dragon spacecraft is expected to splashdown near the coast of California, USA on July 15, 2025 at 15:00hrs (IST).

ISRO Announces National Space Science Symposium 2026 (NSSS-2026) Home / ISRO Announces National Space Science Symposium 2026 (NSSS-2026) July 03, 2025 On July 3, 2025, Dr.V.Narayanan, Secretary, DOS / Chairman, ISRO made the announcement of the 23 rd National Space Science Symposium, i.e. NSSS-2026, and launched the website of the symposium, through an online event from ISRO Headquarters. Dr.V.Narayanan, Secretary, DOS / Chairman, ISRO launching the 23 rd National Space Science Symposium website The 23 rd edition of the National Space Science Symposium will be hosted by the North East Space Applications Centre (NESAC), Department of Space, at Umiam, in the state of Meghalaya, during 23-27 February 2026. The online event was attended by Shri. A.S. Kiran Kumar, former Secretary, DOS / Chairman, ISRO and Chair, National Organising Committee-NSSS-2026, Shri. M.Ganesh Pillai, Scientific Secretary, ISRO, Dr. S.P.Aggarwal, Director, NESAC, Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das, Director, Science Programme Office, ISRO HQ, as well as several senior academicians from Indian academic / research institutes, and officials from ISRO/DOS, who are the organising members of the symposium. The National Space Science Symposium, a biennial event commenced in year 1978, has undergone evolution in its pattern and scope, in tune with the global trend of space exploration. NSSS, in its current form, is envisaged as a vehicle for progress in space science and technology, providing opportunity to Indian researchers working at various institutes and universities to present their scientific research, discuss on scientific problems of interest in the area of space sciences encompassing topics from all the domains of space science. The symposium comprises plenary sessions, public lectures, oral and poster presentations in technical parallel sessions, a dedicated student session and exhibition. To know more about the symposium, visit the Website of NSSS-2026: www.nsss2026.in

Space Applications Centre Organises National Space Science Meeting SAMHITA-2025 Home / Space Applications Centre Organises National Space Science Meeting SAMHITA-2025 May 19, 2025 The Space Applications Centre (SAC) Ahmedabad, organised a National Space Science meeting- SAMHITA ( SAC A stronomy M icrogravity H eliophysics I onosphere vaar TA ) during May 5-6, 2025. The meeting was attended by 150 delegates including scientists from ISRO/DOS and experts from academic institutions- IIST, TIFR, IIT-M, IIT-K, NISER, ARIES, NIRMA University, IIG, SPU, CVMU & Ahmedabad University. Chairman ISRO / Secretary, DOS, Dr. V Narayanan addressed the participants of the meeting, and emphasized on the importance of the confluence of community wisdom in shaping up the roadmap for the space science exploration activities of the country. Director, SAC, Dr. Nilesh M Desai delivered the opening remarks. Deputy Director- EPSA/SAC Dr Rashmi Sharma set the context of the meeting and elaborated on the expectations from the space agency-academia synergy. Dr Tirtha Pratim Das, Director, Science Programme Office, ISRO Headquarters presented a brief account of the space science research being carried out in ISRO/DOS. Dr Mehul R Pandya, Group Director, Space Applications Centre, presented an overview of Space Science research activities and initiatives at SAC. During the national meet, a total of 40 eminent national speakers delivered talks in 9 sessions on topics ranging from astronomy, astrophysics, experiments in micro-gravity conditions, Heliophysics, magnetosphere, space weather, and Ionosphere - Thermosphere. The deliberations were focused towards initiatives and research outcome of studies being carried out in the specific domains, towards ISRO’s current and future space science missions. Secretary DoS/Chairman ISRO, Dr V. Narayanan and Director SAC, Shri Nilesh M. Desai addressing the delegates of SAMHITA – National meeting to discuss space science research initiatives at SAC, ISRO SAMHITA – National meeting to discuss space science research initiatives at SAC, ISRO

Updates on Gaganyaan, Space Docking Technology and GLEX2025 Home / Updates on Gaganyaan, Space Docking Technology and GLEX2025 May 07, 2025 At a media briefing, Dr. V. Narayanan, Chairman of the Space Commission, Secretary of DoS, and Chairman of ISRO, and Dr. Jitendra Singh, Hon’ble Minister of State for Space, highlighted the latest updates on Gaganyaan and the future human space programme, along with a demonstration of related space docking technology. The contributions of Indian astronauts towards the Gaganyaan programme and India’s rising role in global space exploration, highlighted through a curtain raiser of #GLEX2025, reflect the vision of Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi.

Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), Department of Space (DoS) and Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, Department of Science & Technology signs Framework Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Space Medicine Home / ISRO,DoS,SCTIMST,DST signs Framework Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Space Medicine April 25, 2025 Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), Department of Space (DoS) and Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology (SCTIMST), Department of Science & Technology (DST) signed the ‘Framework Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Space Medicine’. This partnership marks significant milestone in the advancement of Space Medicine and its applications in the country. Indian Human Space program, Gaganyaan is a national endeavour of ISRO offering a unique opportunity to various national agencies, academia and industry in the fields of human health research, microgravity research, space medicine and space biology. This framework MoU between ISRO and SCTIMST will lead to cooperation in the niche field of Space Medicine which will benefit the national human space programme as well as spur innovations and developments in the fields of Human Physiological Studies, Behavioural Health Studies, Biomedical Support Systems, Radiation Biology & Medicine, Countermeasures for improving Human Health & Performance in Space Environment, Telemedicine and communication Protocols and Crew Medical Kit for Space Missions. The program will create opportunities for studies and experiments, especially in the field of Space Medicine. Dr. V Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO and Secretary DOS & Chairman, Space Commission emphasised that the national human spaceflight endeavour, Gaganyaan aims to enhance nation’s capacity in the field of Human Research under space environment. He highlighted that maintaining human health and performance in the extreme environment of Outer Space is very important for the successful long duration human space missions. A national space based platform such as the Bharatiya Antariksh Station will enable the utilisation of the niche space environment to undertake cutting edge human research and technology development based on our national priorities. This collaboration can inspire young people to pursue careers in STEM fields, driving innovation in the country. Dr. Kris Gopalakrishnan expressed his desire that this innovative venture will lead to excellent cooperation between academia-industry sector in the field of medical device development. Dr. Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary & Head, AI Division, DST said that Research & Developments in Space Medicine will enhance the understanding on human physiology, human adaption, development of new medical devices and diagnostic procedures. These developments for space have the potential to improve healthcare for people on Earth. Dr Sanjay Behari, Director, SCTIMST thanked Chairman, ISRO and said that SCTIMST is looking forward for a fruitful collaboration with ISRO in developing clean room and zero gravity labs in focus and space medicine, in co-developing biomedical devices and is translating equipment developed for space exploration for human health on earth. The MOU was signed by Dr Sanjay Behari, Director of SCTIMST and Shri M Ganesh Pillai, Scientific Secretary, ISRO in the presence of Dr V Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO & Secretary, DOS, Shri. Krish Gopalakrishnan, President, SCTIMST; Shri. Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary & Head AI Division, DST, Govt. of India; Prof. Manikandan, Deputy Director, SCTIMST and other senior faculty members of ISRO and SCTIMST. The MoU signing ceremony was attended by Dr Unnikrishnan Nair, Director, VSSC; Shri M Mohan, Director, LPSC; Shri Dinesh Kumar Singh, Director, HSFC; Prof Dipankar Banerjee, Director IIST, Thiruvananthapuram and Shri Hanamantary Baluragi, Director, Human Space Program, ISRO HQ, Bengaluru. About SCTIMST Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology (SCTIMST) is a premier medical research institute in India, recognized as a Statutory Body and an Institute of National Importance under the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India. The institute focuses on developing innovative medical technologies, treating complex diseases, and is providing advanced healthcare services focused in the fields of cardiac and neurosciences. With state-of-the-art facilities and a team of renowned experts, SCTIMST contributes significantly to medical research, education, biomedical device development, preventive health and healthcare delivery. About ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) is the space agency of India. The organisation is involved in science, engineering and technology to harvest the benefits of outer space for India and the mankind. ISRO is a major constituent of the Department of Space (DOS), Government of India. The department executes the Indian Space Programme primarily through various Centres or units within ISRO.

ISRO takes up the Lead Role of "International Charter Space and Major Disasters" for six months from April 2025 Home / ISRO takes up the Lead Role of "International Charter Space and Major Disasters" for six months from April 2025 April 25, 2025 India, through the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), once again demonstrated its initiative in space-based disaster management by assuming the lead role of the "International Charter Space and Major Disasters" for 6 months from April 2025. The Lead Role tenure started with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC)/ ISRO organising the 53 rd meeting of the Charter in Hyderabad during 14-17 th April 2025. It witnessed the participation of major global space agencies (with 22 foreign delegates attending in person) engaged in space-based disaster management activities. India is signatory to the Charter which celebrates its 25 th anniversary in 2025, with ISRO being a founder member. The Charter functions as a collaborative framework involving 17 member organizations, who voluntarily provide Earth observation data and value-added products for managing disasters occurring globally. Dr. V. Narayanan, Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary, DoS addressed the Board Members of the International Charter and reiterated ISRO’s commitment to the Charter in using space technology for disaster management support. During the lead role period for the next six months, NRSC/ ISRO would be coordinating the global disaster response efforts of the Charter using space-based assets, including managing the activation requests, rapid dissemination of products, leading strategic planning, and facilitating training; outreach and capacity-building activities. India’s lead role in the Charter reflects decades of sustained investment in space technology, international cooperation, technical prowess, and humanitarian commitment. Secretary, Department of Space and Chairman, ISRO, addressing the Delegates during the 53 rd meeting of the Charter Board & Executive Secretariat Members of the International Charter during the 53 rd Charter Meeting, held in Hyderabad between 14–17 th April 2025

Ocean Colour Monitor-3(OCM-3) Satellite Imagery and Vegetation Dynamics: Unveiling Global Patterns Home / Ocean Colour Monitor-3(OCM-3) Satellite Imagery and Vegetation Dynamics: Unveiling Global Patterns April 03, 2025 Satellites are indispensable in capturing global-scale vegetation patterns, enabling scientists to assess how vegetation growth shifts in response to climate dynamics, environmental changes, and human activities. Instruments such as NASA’s MODIS on Terra and the ISROs EOS-06 OCM-3 payload measure energy across visible and near-infrared regions to derive the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). This index is a crucial tool for understanding how photosynthesis contributes to sequestering carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into biomass and soils, forming a key component of studies on the carbon cycle. Vegetation maps generated from these satellite observations depict a scale of “greenness” that reflects the vegetation density, type, and overall health. Regions with dense, vigorous growth are rendered in dark green, while areas with sparse vegetation appear in lighter, tan hues, with gray representing zones lacking sufficient data. This colour-coded representation illustrates the year-round lushness near the equator—where conditions such as temperature, rainfall, and sunlight are optimal—and highlights seasonal fluctuations in vegetation as one moves toward the poles. The Animation showing the Monthly Global NDVI derived from EOS-06 OCM data during April 2023 – Feb 2025. Advanced processing techniques have further enhanced the value of these remote sensing observations. For example, the EOS-06 OCM-3 system operates in Global Area Coverage mode, gathering data at regular cycles and leveraging GPU parallel processing to manage the immense data volume. By extracting specific spectral bands from Level-1C radiance products, stacking the pixel data, and applying the Maximum Value Composite method, high-resolution NDVI mosaics are generated efficiently. These products have been validated against established MODIS composites, ensuring that temporal variations and spatial patterns in vegetation are reliably captured. Integrating these sophisticated NDVI products into visualization portals supports various applications—from academic research to practical resource management. Farmers and forest managers use detailed vegetation maps to monitor the health of croplands and forests. At the same time, environmental scientists rely on them to analyze broader ecological trends and carbon cycling dynamics. This synergy of advanced satellite technology, high-speed data processing, and detailed mapping deepens our understanding of Earth’s ecosystems. It facilitates more informed decisions in managing natural resources and mitigating climate change impacts.

Leveraging Indian National Satellite System (INSAT) Geostationary Satellite for advanced lightning detection and analysis Home / Leveraging Indian National Satellite System (INSAT) Geostationary Satellite for advanced lightning detection and analysis April 01, 2025 NRSC/ISRO achieves a breakthrough in the now-casting of the lightning events over India using data from Indian geostationary satellites. Atmospheric lightning occurs due to the complex interactions of meteorological parameters under the influence of convective processes in the troposphere. Key drivers of these convective phenomena include surface radiation, temperature, and wind. Lightning now-casting assumes importance as lightning is a dominant natural hazard over the tropics. NRSC/ISRO researchers observed lightning signatures in the Outgoing Longwave Radiation (OLR) data from the INSAT-3D satellite. The reduction in OLR strength is an indicator for potential lightning occurrences. The near real-time observations from the INSAT series satellites were utilized to detect and identify signatures indicative of lightning occurrences. To further enhance the detection of lightning activity, additional parameters such as Land Surface Temperature (LST) and wind were incorporated in the development of a composite variable to improve predictive accuracy. The developed composite variable effectively captures the variations in lightning activity observed by ground-based measurements. It provides a reliable indication of when lightning activity is likely to peak or subside, allowing for improved prediction of lightning occurrence and intensity. This composite variable enables the prediction of lightning occurrences with a lead time of approximately 2.5 hours. Lightning strikes (yellow) & INSAT 3D - OLR (blue-green) over India Combined lightning precursor from OLR, LST and Wind along with actual lightning strikes measured from ground sensors at NRSC. The zoomed portion emphasis the delay between the combined variable and lightning occurrences. Cross-Correlation of combined lightning precursor with actual strikes with respect to time.

POEM Completed 1000 Orbits in Space Home / POEM Completed 1000 Orbits in Space March 07, 2025 The fourth edition of the PSLV Orbital platform Experiment Module (POEM-4), the repurposed spent upper stage of the PSLV vehicle used for PSLV-C60/ SPADEX Mission, has successfully completed 1000 orbits on March 04, 2025. The PSLV-C60 Mission was launched on December 30, 2024 and POEM-4 began its operations subsequent to the successful injection of the SPADEX spacecraft. POEM-4 was configured as a three-axis stabilized platform that carried 24 payloads including 10 payloads from Non-Governmental Entities (NGEs) and 14 payloads from ISRO/DoS. All the payloads including those from NGEs have successfully completed the intended experiments in orbit. POEM-4 carried out experiments in space robotics, germination of seeds & growth of bacterium in microgravity, green propulsion, laser ignition of pyro thrusters, amateur radio transmission and advanced sensors. The up-linking & execution of an AI model as part of AI lab in space was also tested by a space start-up. The POEM-4 avionics system also validated a Mission Management Computer based on a “Made-in-India” 32-bit processor, Vikram3201, with a custom architecture developed by ISRO along with the use of a Nano star sensor for the first time to aid the navigation system. The platform also employed a stabilization system based on reaction wheels for attitude control along with cold gas thrusters that extended the orbital life of the module by at least 45 days compared to previous POEM missions. POEM-4 carried the maximum number of payloads till date compared to the previous three POEM missions and has yet again proved its versatility as a cost-effective experimental platform to support diverse payloads. PS4 stage with POEM payloads assembled

Dr. V. Narayanan Assumed Charge of Secretary, Department of Space and Chairman, Space Commission Home / Secretary, DOS and Chairman, Space Commission January 13, 2025 On the afternoon of January 13, 2025, Dr. V. Narayanan assumed charge as Secretary, Department of Space and Chairman, Space Commission Dr. V. Narayanan , Distinguished Scientist (Apex Grade), assumed the charge of Secretary, Department of Space, Chairman, Space Commission and Chairman, ISRO on the afternoon of 13th January, 2025. Prior to this, he served as Director, Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC), one of the major Centres of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), with its headquarters at Valiamala in Thiruvananthapuram and a unit at Bangalore. As Director, he provided techno-managerial leadership to LPSC, which is engaged in the development of Liquid, Semi-Cryogenic and Cryogenic Propulsion Stages for Launch Vehicles, Chemical and Electric Propulsion Systems for Satellites, Control Systems for Launch Vehicles and Transducer development for propulsion system health monitoring. ISRO Propulsion Complex (IPRC) located at Mahendragiri (Tamil Nadu) is a unit of ISRO responsible for Assembly, Integration and testing of Liquid Propulsion systems. As Chairman of LPSC-IPRC Coordination Committee, he was responsible for reviewing and executing the activities. Dr. V Narayanan as the Chairman of Project Management Council-Space Transportation System (PMC-STS), the decision making body in all Launch Vehicle projects & programmes, guided the operational and development activities of launch vehicle of ISRO. He was also the Chairman of the National Level Human Rated Certification Board (HRCB) of Gaganyaan programme. Dr. V Narayanan, who is a Rocket and Spacecraft Propulsion Expert, joined ISRO in 1984 and functioned in various capacities before becoming Director of the Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre in January, 2018. Dr. V Narayanan, hailing from a humble family background, completed his M. Tech in Cryogenic Engineering and Ph.D. in Aerospace Engineering from IIT, Kharagpur where he was awarded a Silver Medal for achieving the first rank in M. Tech programme. He has also been honoured with the Distinguished Alumni Award in 2018 and the Life Fellowship Award 2023 by IIT, Kharagpur. He started his career, initially with TI Diamond Chain Ltd, Madras Rubber Factory, BHEL, Trichy and BHEL, Ranipet for one and half years before joining ISRO in 1984. In ISRO, he has completed 40 years of Meritorious service including 7 years as Director of Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre. Due to his hard work and contributions, he was promoted to the highest level Distinguished Scientist (APEX Scale). Under his leadership, LPSC delivered 226 Liquid Propulsion Systems and Control Power plants for Launch Vehicles and Satellites of ISRO. When India was denied the Cryogenic Technology for GSLV Mk-ll vehicle, he designed the engine systems, developed necessary software tools, contributed for establishing the necessary infrastructure / test facilities, testing and qualification and completing the development of Cryogenic Upper Stage (CUS) and making it operational. As Project Director for C25 Cryogenic Project of LVM3 vehicle, he led the team in successfully developing C25 Cryogenic Stage powered by a 20-tonne thrust Engine and played vital role in the successful launch of LVM3 vehicle in its maiden attempt and made the stage operational. His M.Tech thesis work and Ph.D. work were employed in the cryogenic propulsion systems development. The development of Cryogenic Propulsion Systems made India one among six countries to have this capability and ensured self-reliance in Launch Vehicle. Towards the LVM3-M1/Chandrayaan-2 and LVM3/Chandrayaan-3 missions, he led the teams and developed & delivered the L110 Liquid Stage and C25 Cryogenic Stage for the LVM3 vehicle and the propulsion systems which took the spacecraft from Earth to the Moon's orbit and Throttleable propulsion system of the Vikram lander used for soft landing near the south pole of the moon. He was the Chairman of the National Level Expert Committee which pinpointed the reasons for Chandrayaan-2 hard landing and recommended necessary improvements which eventually contributed to the success of Chandrayaan-3 and made India as the first country to soft-land near south-pole of Moon. For PSLV C57/Aditya L1 mission, he led the teams in realisation of 2nd and 4th Stages and Control Power Plants of the launch vehicle and the propulsion system used for traversing the spacecraft from Earth’s orbit to L1 point of the Sun and retaining it in the Halo orbit. As the Chairman of the Mission Readiness Review, he reviewed the mission and ensured India becoming the fourth country to have a successful satellite to study Sun. Towards Human Space Flight Gaganyaan Programme, he contributed to Human Rating of LVM3 vehicle, development of Human rated L110 and C32 Cryogenic Stages, Environmental Control & Life Support System, Service and Crew module propulsion systems and Test vehicle for Crew escape system demonstration. As Chairman of Gaganyaan Certification Board, he contributed to certification process of various systems for Human Space Flight. Under his leadership, the development of a new cryogenic stage (C32) was completed successfully and the stage was delivered for the first Gaganyaan mission. He was also leading the development activities like, 200-tonne thrust LOX-Kerosene Semi Cryogenic Rocket System for improving LVM3 payload, a 110T thrust LOX-Methane engine for future launch vehicles, Electric and green propulsion systems for spacecrafts. As Chairman of Project Management Council of Space Transportation System, he guided the teams for the operational & new launch vehicles. He was also responsible for the Propulsion Systems for Venus Orbiter, Chandrayaan-4, Gaganyaan, Bharatiya Antariksha Station (BAS) and Next Generational Launch Vehicle programme cleared by Cabinet recently. Dr. Narayanan has been honoured with 26 awards. He is a recipient of the Gold Medal from the Astronautical Society of India (ASI), ASI Award for Rocket and Related Technologies, Team Award from High Energy Materials Society of India (HEMSI), Performance Excellence Award and Team Excellence Award of ISRO, National Design Award from NDRF, Institution of Engineers, India and National Aeronautical prize from Aeronautical Society of India, Honorary Degree of Doctor of Science (Honoris Causa) from Sathyabama University, Chennai, Distinguished Alumnus Award-2018 by IIT, Kharagpur, APJ Abdul Kalam Award 2023, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister's award for Chandrayaan-3, Life Fellowship Award of IIT-Kharagpur in 2023 and awarded 2024 Laurels for Team Achievement for Chandrayaan-3 by International Academy of Astronautics. Dr. Narayanan is a Member of Space Propulsion Committee of International Astronautical Federation (IAF), Member of International Academy of Astronautics (IAA), Fellow of Indian National Academy of Engineering, Fellow of Institution of Engineers (India), Fellow of Indian Cryogenic Council, Fellow of Aeronautical Society of India, Fellow of Astronautical Society of India, National President of Indian Systems Society of Science & Engineering. He has served as Governing Council Member of INAE for 6 years, and Member in various National and International Professional Bodies. Member of IIST Board and Governing Council. Dr. Narayanan has published large number of technical papers including 1200 internal ISRO reports, 50 Journal & conference papers and few numbers of book chapters.

Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS Inaugurated START-2025 Event Home / Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS Inaugurated START-2025 Event January 13, 2025 The third edition of the START programme, START-2025, was inaugurated by Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS, in online mode, on January 9, 2025, from ISRO Headquarters, Bengaluru. The inaugural event marked the beginning of the twenty-days long (from January 9 to 29, 2025) online lecture series, to be delivered by eminent scientists from different institutes across the country, including ISRO/DOS centres. Primarily aimed at the final year Under Graduate and Post Graduate students of physical sciences, engineering and technology of Indian academic institutes, the START programme provides a broad overview of several facets of space science and exploration. The START programme benefits, on an average, nearly forty thousand students, teachers, and space enthusiasts in general, and since the year 2023, has created an impact on the community of senior students and faculty members of academic institutes, to embrace space science and technology as career-path. The START event, every year, is offered with specific themes related to space science and technology. The maiden START event, i.e. START-2023, was on the theme of ‘Overview of Space Science and Technology’. The theme for START-2024 was ‘Exploration of the Solar System’, while in this year, START-2025 has the theme ‘Future of India’s Space Exploration’. Every year, about a few hundreds of academic institutes volunteer as nodal centres, to facilitate their students to attend this event. START-2025 event has 563 institutes serving as nodal centres. The participants of the START programme fall under three categories, viz. Category-1 (those who participate by enrolling under a nodal centre), Category-2 (registered individual participants (including students who are not eligible / could not join through the category-1) of any background and Category-3 (individual space enthusiasts, who attend the lectures through YouTube). The category-1 students get the opportunity to appear in an online test conducted after the conclusion of the course, while the category-2 students get the opportunity to participate in quiz contests after each lecture. Both the category 1 and 2 participants are given suitable certificates, subject to a few conditions. As a follow-on, a few toppers among the category-1 students are provided opportunity to participate in a specially curated students’ session in the National Space Science Symposium (NSSS), where they are offered advanced workshops on space science & technology, opportunities to closely interact with senior scientists of ISRO/DOS, as well as present their scientific ideas. Connections are established among these students so as to build a strong network of like-minded scientifically oriented future generation of space scientists and technologists. During the inaugural event of START-2025, the address by Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS specially targeted the student community to make them aware of their crucial role to build the advanced capabilities of India’s space science and technology. He inspired the students by urging them to find out their own capabilities and introspect how may they contribute to the advancement of the space science exploration of India. The importance of the Space Vision 2047 was emphasized where the country envisions its own space station, the Bharatiya Antariksha Station (BAS) and the scenario where Indians will land on the Moon and come back to the Earth safely after performing scientific experiments, all with indigenous technology. Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS was joined by Shri A S Kiran Kumar, Chair, Apex science Board, ISRO, former Chairman, ISRO / Secretary, DOS, member of the Space Commission; Shri Victor Joseph, Scientific Secretary, ISRO; Dr. Raghavendra Pratap Singh, Director of the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), ISRO, Dehradun; Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das, Director of the Science Programme Office, ISRO Headquarters; Dr. Harish Karnatak, Head, GIT&DL Department, IIRS, ISRO, and Dr. Praveen Kumar K, Deputy Director, Science Programme Office, ISRO Headquarters. The inaugural event was followed by the introductory lecture by Dr. Tirtha Pratim Das on the ‘Past, Present and Future of Indian Space Exploration: Context for START-2025’. ISRO encourages the space enthusiasts to watch the lectures through the YouTube channel of the IIRS Digital Learning Programme, https://youtube.com/@iirsoutreachdehradun. More details on the START programme, including the lecture schedule and study material are available through the website https://jigyasa.iirs.gov.in/START.

Launching of ISRO’s Virtual Space Museum “SPARK” Home /Launching of ISRO’s Virtual Space Museum “SPARK” While the country is celebrating Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav – the 75th year of Independence, ISRO has come up with an innovative idea of showcasing digital content pertaining to various ISRO missions in an interactive manner. The Virtual Space Museum “SPARK” was launched by Secretary, DOS / Chairman, ISRO on 10.08.2022 for the public use. The platform hosts several documents, images & videos related to ISRO launch vehicles, satellites and scientific missions. Chairman, ISRO & Directors of the various ISRO centres appreciated the initiative taken and suggested more non-sensitive digital content to be brought on this platform for use by different stakeholders. The beta version of the application can be accessed through ISRO website or at https://apps.isro.gov.in/spacepark/

Indian National Space Promotion and Authorization Center (IN-SPACe) Home /About/ ISRO Centres / IN-SPACe IN-SPACe Headquarters Department of Space, Government of India Bopal-Shilaj Road, Bopal Ahmedabad, Gujarat, 380058 Chairman: Dr. Pawan Kumar Goenka Email: contact-us[at]inspace[dot]gov[dot]in Visit Us Indian National Space Promotion and Authorization Center (IN-SPACe) Indian National Space Promotion and Authorisation Centre (IN-SPACe) is a single-window, independent, nodal agency that functions as an autonomous agency in the Department of Space (DOS). It is formed following the Space sector reforms to enable and facilitate the participation of private players. IN-SPACe is responsible to promote, enable authorize and supervise various space activities of non-governmental entities including building launch vehicles & satellites and providing space-based services; sharing space infrastructure and premises under the control of DOS/ISRO; and establishing of new space infrastructure and facilities. The agency acts as an interface between ISRO and Non-Governmental Entities (NGEs) and assesses how to utilize India's space resources better and increase space-based activities. It also assesses the needs and demands of private players, including educational and research institutions, and explores ways to accommodate these requirements in consultation with ISRO. ISRO Centres & Units Department of Space and ISRO HQ Human Space Flight Centre (HSFC) Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS) ISRO Inertial Systems Unit (IISU) ISRO Propulsion Complex (IPRC) ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network (ISTRAC) Laboratory for Electro-Optics Systems (LEOS) Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre(LPSC) Master Control Facility (MCF) National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC) SHAR Space Applications Centre (SAC) U R Rao Satellite Centre (URSC) Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre(VSSC) IN-SPACe CPSEs Antrix Corporation Limited NewSpace India Limited (NSIL) Autonomous bodies Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL) North Eastern-Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC) Physical Research Laboratory (PRL) ISRO Centres & Units Department of Space and ISRO HQ Human Space Flight Centre (HSFC) Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS) ISRO Inertial Systems Unit (IISU) ISRO Propulsion Complex (IPRC) ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network (ISTRAC) Laboratory for Electro-Optics Systems (LEOS) Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre(LPSC) Master Control Facility (MCF) National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC) SHAR Space Applications Centre (SAC) U R Rao Satellite Centre (URSC) Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre(VSSC) IN-SPACe CPSEs Antrix Corporation Limited NewSpace India Limited (NSIL) Autonomous bodies Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL) North Eastern-Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC) Physical Research Laboratory (PRL)